Welcome back learners. In this video we
are going to take a deep dive into the
fascinating world of digital ads,
focusing on how they work, particularly
by understanding behavioural and
contextual targeting. We'll also look
at advanced technologies. If you've
ever wondered, right, if you have been
thinking about something and
immediately that ad pops up on your
Instagram feed or across the internet,
we'll try to have an answer for this,
how this actually works and how they
kind of show an ad that you have been
thinking about.
We'll try to answer like do they really
read your mind and show a particular ad
at the right point, at the right place.
So by the end of this video, you will
have a solid understanding of these
concepts and how marketeers reach the
right audience and the right message at
the right time. Let's start with 2
important types of targeting in digital
advertisements. One is behavioural
targeting and another one is known as
contextual targeting. The behavioural
targeting focuses on the actions of
users and their behaviour online. It
tracks users based on past actions,
interests, and interactions, especially
it uses the data gathered from previous
activities such as websites you have
visited, search queries, social media
behaviour, and more. And then it tries
to predict what the user might be
interested in. So if someone frequently
visits websites about fitness or
searches for gym equipment, advertisers
can target that user with ads related
to fitness products, gym membership, or
health supplements.
The main benefit of behavioural
targeting is that it enables
advertisers to serve highly
personalised ads to users who have
shown interest in similar topics,
making the ads more relevant and
increase the likelihood of conversion.
Imagine in a way like maybe you've just
recently got blessed with a child and
you have been looking around childcare
products all across the internet, so
the algorithm will try to show you ads
related to childcare products like
Pampers and all those things. So this
is a typical. behavioural based
targeting, where the algorithm tries to
understand what your behaviour has been
and then try to match an ad which is
relevant as per your behaviour. Now
let's look into contextual targeting.
We'll learn what contextual targeting
is and we'll go back to the similar
example and see how the world would be
different in a contextual targeting
environment. So first, what's a
contextual targeting? Contextual
targeting doesn't only rely on your
pulse. behaviour, but it also focuses
on the context of where the user is
located or currently engaged with.
Remember our previous example where in
a behavioural targeting mechanism,
since you were blessed with a child and
you were only searching for a childcare
product online. The algorithm was
trying to show you childcare products,
related ads across the way. Now imagine
in a way Like, you know, one of your
friends calls up and says, like, hey,
let's meet for a drink tonight. And you
know you went to a bar, and at this bar,
you're not being shown a childcare
product ad. Now you're shown like, hey,
if you buy this wine, there's another
discount of ₹1000 or ₹2000.
In a case of behavioural based
targeting, it knows based on your past
behaviour you have been looking for
childcare products, so it was just
showing you childcare products without
understanding the context where you are
placed right now. But in terms of
contextual advertisement, the key
advantage is it not only understands.
Your past behaviour, but also the
context you are in. Since you are out
with your friend on an evening sitting
on a bar, you might not be interested
in buying a childcare product even
though you have past behaviours of it,
but it understands your current
location and current context, and it
shows you a relevant contextual ad
which is relevant based on your present
behaviour and not on your past
behaviour. These are the differences
between behavioral-based targeting and
contextual-based targeting.
Now that you understand the basics of
behavioural and contextual targeting,
let's look at how Marketing digital
advertisements uses technology,
especially machine learning, to change
the digital advertisement ecosystem.
Many of you already know machine
learning is a subset of artificial
intelligence or AI that allows systems
to learn and improve from experience
without being explicitly programmed in
the context of digital advertising.
Machine learning algorithms help
improve targeting, ad relevance, and
campaign performance over time by
analysing large sets of data and
behaviours. For example, machine
learning can help determine which ads
are most likely to resonate with
specific audience groups based on their
historical and contextual data. OK. One
of the use cases that they use is
collaborative filtering. In this method,
it analyses the preferences of similar
users to predict what another user
might like. For example, if user A And
user B shared a common interest in
fitness products. Collaborative
filtering might suggest that user A
would also be interested in the items
user B has purchased. In digital
advertisement. This approach helps
deliver.
Almost equivalent of personalised
product recommendations, which
increases the relevance and drives
sales. For instance, if a user buys a
fitness tracker, collaborative
filtering can suggest accessories
related to what similar users have
already bought. Then we have clustering
for relevant ads. Moving from almost
personalised recommendations. Let's now
discuss which clusters users to
segments based on shared
characteristics. By grouping users with
similar behaviours or demographics,
clustering enables advertisers to
create audience segments such as high
spenders or frequent shoppers. This
segment can be targeted with tailored
ads, for instance, premium products for
high spenders or discounts and loyalty
programmes for frequent shoppers. This
method ensures ads are more relevant,
improving engagement and conversions by
focusing. On the unique needs of each
group. Next, let's look at how the
neighbourhood algorithm is also used,
which helps advertisers understand and
target users based on local trends and
proximity. If a significant number of
users in a particular area are engaging
with the content, the neighbourhood
algorithm understands it and shows all
those related ads to the people in the
neighbourhood.
To wrap up, we have explored the power
of behavioural and contextual targeting,
how technologies like machine learning
enable advertisers to deliver almost
personalised, relevant, and effective
ads. This technique allows marketeers
to reach the right audience with the
right message at the right time,
whether it's providing real-time
recommendation, targeting users based
on their location, or grouping them
into meaningful segments. These
strategies help businesses create
campaigns that drive real results.
Understanding this will help you
understand the whole digital marketing
ecosystem and enabling you to connect
with the right audience in a more
meaningful way. OK, with this, I will
leave you with one quote from Mike
Tyson. He says everyone has a plan till
you get punched in the face. Similarly,
in digital marketing also, you might
have the perfect plan, but once your
campaign goes live, they might surprise
you. The key to success is staying
closure to your data, adapting quickly,
and knowing when to cut your losses or
when to double down. This is the
mindset that separates great
performance marketeers from the rest.
