Let's start with Google Trends. So
Google Trends is a tool that helps you
understand.
What people are searching across the
world, uh, across any region, across
any category. So let's see what people
are searching for iPhone.
So let's suppose we're looking for
iPhone 17, let's click on explore.
So this is where we can see how people
in India have been searching across
iPhone in the last 24 hours. Uh, this
tool also helps you understand search
trend for Google Web Search and even
YouTube.
Now let's suppose we want to do a
comparison of two categories. Let's
suppose a
MacBook.
OK. Now, we will again come back to
this Google search view. It gives you a
very interesting graph which helps you
understand for these two terms, iPhone
17 and MacBook, how the interest of
people in India have been, uh, changing
in the last 24 hours. Of course, we can
go ahead and change the timeline. Let's
suppose we want to see the data for the
last 3 months. Uh, this is, you can see
MacBook,
interest has been spiked in the last
few days.
Of course, we can go back and change
the timeline as we want. Uh, again, we
can look into either what people are
searching across Google search, image,
Google shopping, news, or even YouTube,
as I mentioned.
OK, but the interesting thing over here
is, let's suppose we want to again go
back to uh Google search over here.
Again, we're looking into two search
term categories like iPhone 17 and
MacBook. We first understood how we can
understand what people are searching
for and what the trend looks like, but
also if you scroll down a little below,
uh, we will also see what are the other
top queries associated with these
keyboards.
One is like people are mostly searching
for iPhone 17 Pro that has been up by
4%, people who are searching for 17 Pro
Max, that is down by -4%, so on and so
forth. So it gives you an overview of
what people are searching and as a
marketeer, how you can cater to this
demand.
Similarly, you can see on the right
side of the screen, uh, some of the
rising queries in terms of the fastest
growing queries you can imagine, like
people who have been, uh, looking for
the Republic Day offers or some Vijay
sales offers and so on and so forth. So
this is all about Google trends.
OK, now we will explore another tool,
uh, which is a part of Google Trends.
It's called trends.google.com/tv. Uh,
again, it's, uh, it's a, it's a tool
that helps you understand, uh, what are
the top searches that are appearing in
a particular country. So let's suppose
we want to see what is trending in
Canada.
So you will see what are the top
searches people in Canada are doing.
Let's suppose you want to see it for
India.
Again, people are India are right now
searching for the, some of these top
searches. So it's a very cool tool
which helps you understand what people
are searching in a particular country
at an aggregate level.
OK, uh, now we will explore another
free tool, which is called Uber Suggest,
but before we go there, let's try to
understand what's the motivation of
people who are searching what they're
searching for. So the technical term
that we use as marketeers is called a
search engine. It basically talks about.
What's the purpose of an individual?
Why she is making an online search?
It's the reason behind why he or she
conducts a specific search. So
basically we can categorise all the
motivation of a user into 4 major
categories. The first category of
search intent or search motivation is
known as informational intent. It
basically talks about.
People with informational intent have a
specific question or want to know more
about a certain topic, like they want
to know about information, for example,
a search query like what is the capital
of India. It could be categorised as an
informational intent. The person is
looking for some information.
Second is navigational content. For
example, people who search for Facebook,
they're usually on their way to the
Facebook website. Imagine yourself like
if you're going to Google search bar
and just writing out Amazon, your idea
is just to go to Amazon's website. So
you're just using Google Search as a
navigation.
The third category is transactional
intent, where people are
looking or their purpose is to buy
something, right? So sometimes you
write like, OK, buy an iPhone 17, right?
So that's the transactional intent that
we call. Sometimes you're not ready to
buy, you are just in an investigation
mode. We call this as a commercial
investigation. These people also have a
transactional mode, but they're right
now at a little early stage and they're.
Using YouTube or Google to research
about a particular product, for example,
what's the difference between an LG
washing machine model number 3321 as
compared to a Samsung washing machine
or model number 591. So this is where
you're doing a little bit of research,
so we kind of categorise all those.
Particular searches as commercial
investigation.
Now, just remember this fact and let's
go to our tool, which is called Uber
Suggest.
Uh, you can just Google and Uber
Suggest, sign in with your Gmail. It's
a free tool, uh, till a certain extent,
it's free.
Uh, you can use the free version to
kind of get some basic ideas. I've
already signed up over here. Once you
land into Uber, suggest, click on
keyword ideas. Once you click on
keyword ideas,
A screen like this will appear?
Now let's suppose I want to do a search
for bits planning.
OK, so here the results are out.
Remember the intent that we talked
about? You can see over here a C or N,
commercial or navigational. So for
example, people who are just searching
Bits Pilani, they're mostly into
commercial investigation mode, whereas
people who are searching for Bits
Pilani Hyderabad, they're mostly into
transactional mode. They're trying to
get into the Bitspilai Hyderabad
website.
OK, now you can see a lot of other
metrics, as volume, CPC, PD and SU
difficulty. Now, just try to look into
volume and your difficulty. Volume
basically means the monthly search
volume,
like monthly average monthly search
queries for this particular keyword.
Again, example, for Bits Panning, the
average search volume in a particular
month is almost 300,000.
And then what is SO difficulty rate?
It's basically how difficult or how
competitive this keyword is on Google
searches via organic forms.
Now, these are the two things that you
broadly should know, uh.
OK, so why should we consider about
these two things, which is monthly
search volume or SO difficulty rate, or
also sometimes known as keyword
difficulty rate. The monthly search
volume basically talks about the number
of search queries in a particular area
for that particular category or keyword.
SO difficulty rate basically talks
about, as I mentioned, how difficult it
would be or how competitive it would be
to rank those particular keywords. In
an organic way in Google, that is
without paying any money or running any
ads.
So, for example, when you see this in
Uber suggest, as I said, just look into
volume and SA difficulty there. Now
imagine you are a marketeer at
Bitspilani and you have to decide which
keyword to use, for example.
Bitsilani in Goa or Bitspilai Goa,
right, there's a subtle difference over
here. The surge volume in Bitspiani in
Goa is almost 33,000 in a month, and
Bitspilai Goa is only 14,800. On the
face of it, both these keywords look
very similar, but the surge volume has
dropped to half from 33,000 to almost
15,000. But interestingly, the SEO
difficulty rate is almost 18 as
compared to 15. So this particular
keyword, Bitspilai Goa,
is not only a keyword with less search
volume, but also it's highly
competitive. So in that case, it would
be preferred to choose Bitspilai in Goa
as a keyword when you are writing your
blogs or website content. Ideally, a
marketer should choose this one because
it has not only got high surge volume,
but it's it's also less competitive. So
what's the framework over here we are
talking, so whenever you're trying to
write a blog or website content and in
order to ensure Google crawlers quickly
crawl your website, and you have a
higher probability of ranking into the
first page of Google uh in the shortest
possible time.
Just remember the framework. We have to
choose a keyword where the monthly
search volume should not be very high,
because if it's too high, the chances
are the difficulty rate will also be
high or the competitiveness of it will
also be high. But again, it's not
always the case, but generally that's
how it goes. So remember, the monthly
search volume should be moderate,
neither too high nor too low. Uh,
because if it's high, it might be very
competitive, and if it's too low,
there's, there's no point of doing so
much effort. For example, if only 10
people are searching for a particular
category, why to do so much effort?
Then on 2, the essay difficulty rate or
the keyword difficulty rate should be
low to moderate because if it's too
high, it will take a long amount of
time and a lot of effort to get into
the first few pages of Google. So, just
the two frameworks, MSV or the monthly
search volume should be moderate, and
SAO difficulty rate should be low to
moderate. And almost the same principle
applies in any of the AI-based tools as
well, like the GPTs of the world or the
Geminis.
OK, now let's talk about some of the
paid tools that are available. This is
called as SCMrush, it's one of the uh
most popular tools in SEO and uh AI
based content analysis tools. Uh, once
you sign up over here, the tool
provides you a beautiful dashboard.
Again, it's almost provides the same
metric, but at a much deeper level. So
for example, let's take an example of a
category as interior design software,
as you can see over here.
This is a report from SCM Rush itself.
We are looking for a category of
interior design software in the United
States. We are seeing right now 4
different keywords interior design
software, free interior design software,
best interior design software, and 3D
interior design software. And all these
keywords have different keyword volume.
And remember I said some of the tools
call at KD percentage or keyword
difficulty rate, or some say SEO
difficulty rate. It's both the same. Of
course, some measure it on a scale of
100, some measure it on a scale of 50,
but essentially, uh, the same thing.
So with that, uh, let's look at the
first keyword, the interior design
software. It has got a surge volume of
almost 4400 in the US but with a
keyword difficulty data of 72.5. Free
interior design software, however, the
volume drops to 2400, but the keyword
difficulty rate is even higher than
this, which is almost 75. Best interior
design software comes at 880 search
volume, but the keyword difficulty rate
is even higher. 3D interior design
software at the last, it has got the
least search volume and also the least
keyword difficulty rate.
So one of the things is what we can do
is we can probably start with interior
design software because it has got high
surge volume and a moderate keyword
difficulty rate. But in order to Ensure
we choose one of the best keywords, we
could also go with 3D interior design
software, although the search volume is
significantly lower, but so is the
keyword difficulty rate. So probably
our first choice could be 3D interior
design software and gradually move to
interior design software as a keyword.
OK, this is, again, from a tool called
as RFS. Uh, it's again a paid tool. Uh,
you can go and sign up over there and
uh.
You know, get into the keyword analysis
report. Uh, again, we'll look into
three keywords. First keyword is how to
lose weight. Uh, you can see the KAD is
almost at 49, the volume is 90,000. How
to lose weight fast, The KAD drops from
49 to 45, but the surge volume also
drops from 90,000 to 58,000. But lose
weight, where the surge volume is the
least, which is at 35,000, but KD is at
highest, it's at 56.
So, as I mentioned, uh, the KD and the
search volume, it's not like if the
search volume is high, the keyword
difficulty will always be highest, uh,
you know, the data are as for the
competitiveness of a market, of a
category, and of a region. So, the
ideal framework one should use is. The
surge volume should be moderate. You
can take a median or the average of the
surge volumes, and also the keyword
difficulty rate, again, a median or the
average, and it should be low to
moderate. So don't just blindly choose
any keywords which has got a high
search volume or a low search volume.
Uh, just try to marry both the data
points. So in this case, an ideal bet
could be. Choosing the second one, how
to lose weight fast, because it has got
a keyword difficulty rate which is also
moderate, and the volume is also
moderate at 58,000. Because if we
choose the last one, the keyword
difficulty rate is the highest.
OK. Now, we will go to Google Ads
keyword planner. Uh, it's also another
tool where you can, uh, do your keyword
research. Again, we'll talk more on
this once we get into Google Ads
ecosystem. But for now, uh, what you
can do is probably, you can just listen
to this module, but once we get into
the ads module in module 6 or 7, which
is week 6 or 7, we can talk more about
Google Ads, but Google Ads also gives
you a feature to understand what people
are searching in a particular area or
region.
So what we have to do is, once you get
into ads.google.com, so this is the
interface that you can see over here.
All we have to do is click on tools.
Then click on planning. Under Planning,
you'll get Keyword planner as an option.
OK. Now, it again gives you two choices.
Either you can put your website and it
helps you understand what are the key
keywords or thematic keywords that you
should look into. Uh, or there's also
an option, if you just want to plug in
some of the known keywords that you
want to look for, it will give you the
exact search volume. So let's go with
option two for now, which is get search
volume and forecast.
Similar thing, let's say we want to see
for Bitspiani, click started.
OK, so over here you can change the
targeting. It's basically, I want to
see instead of whole of India, I just
want to see.
Ah, Delhi.
So you can see, uh, you can also, uh,
you know, get into some specific areas
of Delhi as well, but let's just stick
to Delhi for now. Click on save. So the
average search volume is anywhere
between 10,000 to 100,000, which is
almost a lakh. Uh, but again, it
doesn't give you the competitiveness
because it just gives you some other ad
metrics which we are not interested
right now, which we'll talk in the
later few modules. But over here you
can get the average monthly searches.
So this is also one of the ways you can
uh look into market demand estimation.
So we talked about a few tools, like
Google Trends, Uber Suggests, Shim Rush,
RFS and Google Ads.
OK, let's suppose you don't want to use
any one of those, so what you can do is
you can go to this website called
Answer the Public.
Just Google it out, click on the first
link, which is answer thepublic.com.
You can sign up with Google uh with a
Gmail account. Uh, let's suppose again
we want to look for.
Let's suppose simple thing, iPhone 17
maybe.
You can select the language, you can
select the region, let's suppose it's
India. Click search.
Just wait for a few seconds, it's
create a kind of a neural map.
OK, so what it does, it's in a, at a
very simplistic thing, it pulls all the
data from Google searches, YouTube, all
the AI models like chat GPTs, Gemini,
across all the social medias, popular
social medias like Twitter and uh
Instagram. Uh, and it pulls out what
are the main categorical searches
happening across all the AI tools,
Google searches, YouTube, and social
media. So for example, it says like in
search engines, uh, in India, iPhone 17
Pro Max is kind of the most searched
term. On the other side, on social
media, iPhone 17 Pro Max is again, kind
of the most trending hashtags, and
people are also searching for that. In
AI models, people are kind of running
some queries like.
When will the next generation of iPhone
17 be launched? What are the expected
features? What are the rumoured design
changes, so on and so forth. So if you
don't want to use any of the technical
tools, uh, your friend is, answer
thepublic.com, it kind of gives you a
very quick data in a short amount of
time. But again, it's not very, uh,
immersive, uh, not very data-oriented,
but if, it just gives you the data in a
few seconds and a few clicks.
