Now we have understood how to
understand market demand. But once we
have understood the market demand,
let's try to understand how we can
forecast a market demand in a very
quick and easy way. Basically how we
can predict a market demand without
using very high level codes or AI or ML
models. With just a few simple clicks
and using Google's ML power, how we can
predict market demand. So for this we
will use this tool called a simple ML
for sheets. Imagine on Google Sheets,
uh, you can run an ML model without
writing even a line of code. This tool,
as I mentioned, it's called Simple ML
for sheets. You can read more about it
on SimLfsheets.com.
With this, let's get to understand what
it does. So SimpleML4 sheets allows
anyone to use machine learning in
Google Sheets without any prior
knowledge of ML coding or the need to
share data with third parties. SimpleML
is an add-on for Google Sheets to solve
the most common ML task. Its main tasks
are highly automated ML capabilities
that do not require users to know ML.
You can do predict missing values, spot
abnormal values, and even forecast
future values.
We are right now interested in the uh
part of forecasting, right? So again,
what is forecasting? Forecasting is the
prediction of future events based on
past data and is central to decision
making in many technical domains. For
instance, predicting product sales in
retail, forecasting energy demand, or
anticipating customer return all have
tremendous value across different
industries.
Forecasting uses historical data to
predict future data by looking for
patterns in the data over time. You can
only forecast future values if each
example in the data set includes a time
or date from the date that was
collected.
OK, so let's take a practise websheet
to understand how we can do it in a
real world. So, yeah, in this tutorial,
we will use simple ML, as I mentioned,
to forecast future values.
Let's assume you were a data analyst
for a air travel company in the 1960s,
and you have records of number of
monthly passengers from January 1949 to
December 1960. Our objective is to
predict the traffic from January 1961
to May 1963.
How to do it. So this is the. Google
Sheet Uh, it will be available on your
portal. You can have a look into that.
So once you click on that, it will say
make a copy.
Just click on make a copy over here.
OK, now we will skip everything and
we'll come to tab number 5, which is
known as case 4 or which is also known
as forecast future values. Now first
step is we have to install the simple
ML4 sheets over here. So we'll go to uh
extensions, we'll click on add-ons,
we'll click on get add-ons.
A simple pop up box will open.
We will write simple ML for sheets.
Let's see this over here.
You'll see simple ML for sheets by
tenor Flow Decision for esteem, click
install, click Continue.
So give the required permissions.
OK, it says it has been installed.
Great.
Let's check. Yeah, it's done. So as you
can see over here, we have the data and
values uh for. All the years and the
passengers, but we don't have values
from 1961. We have values till 1960.
Remember our problem statement? Our
problem statement was we have the data
from January 19949 to December 1960,
but we need to predict that passenger
traffic from January 1961, 1961 to 1963.
So these are the three years we are
predicting. Let's get back over here.
So just select these two things. Again,
click on extensions, you will see your
simple ML4 sheets already installed.
Remember, just a minute back we have
installed it. Now go back to a simple
ML for sheets, click on Start.
OK, it says authorization required.
Just click on continue.
I can click on continue.
Oh.
OK.
Now, we'll click on, as I mentioned,
the tool can do a lot of things. Uh,
first, it can predict missing values,
it can spot abnormal values, or it can
forecast future values. We are
interested on this forecast feature, so
click on that.
So it will ask what we are looking to
forecast, click on value because that's
what this particular column we are
trying to forecast, which is the number
of passengers.
So click on forecast, give it a minute.
OK, so it looks like it's done. Let's
scroll to that down. Yes, it has
started forecasting all the values from
1961 up till 1963, and it automatically
creates a graph also over here, as you
can see. So the blue line is the past
data and the red line is the predicted
value as it mentions, and of course you
can change the timeline as you want.
So this is Simple ML for sheets, which
helps us use a machine learning model
and forecast future values right in a
Google Sheet without writing even a
single piece of code.
