Welcome back learners. Now that we've
gained some understanding of Glove,
let's also implement it in Python and
gain a deeper understanding. All right,
learners, now let's implement the glove
model for word embeddings.
Now the glove model is also available
within Jensen, just like our word to
work model. The benefit of using glove
model is that it's already pre-trained,
right, so you don't have to create your
corpus and then train a model and then
run it on your data. You can just
download the model and start using it
because it may take some time to
download. I've already downloaded it,
so let me take you through the steps.
First, I installed JensenN library in
my environment, then I imported
Jensen.downloader as API, right? I'm
using this API to load my model. I'm
using the Glove Twitter 25 model. It's
a 25 dimension model trained on Twitter
data. It's a relatively smaller model
just for demo purposes. You might want
to use this glov wiki giga 100
dimensions model, right? So I have
executed till this step already, right
now we can just directly run it on our
words. So let's calculate the
similarity between king and queen. So
what I'll do, glove model, which is
this dots similarity, and I will pass
the words between which I want to
calculate my similarity again.
Let's also calculate similarity between
two words like king and car.
So as expected, the similarity between
king and queen is fairly high, 92%,
right, and the similarity between king
and car is lower than that, 66% or 67%.
Let's also now run. Another analogy
task.
So glove model but most similar. Right?
Within positive, I will pass a list of
two words, woman, king. Negative, I'll
pass man. And I want the top one word,
which is the most singular, right?
So let's run this and then I'll explain
what's happening here.
OK.
So what this does is. When I add
positives, so it will add these two
words, woman.
And King Minus man, so it looks like
this equation king minus man plus woman.
Equals needs.
Now let's run it for some different
combination, so woman plus man. Maybe I
want to remove King.
And the result
Let me Not have this
And the result is problem.
Right? So you can now experiment with
as many different words as you want
within positive and negative, and see
what comes out as the output. So this
was the glove model for word embeddings.
I hope you enjoyed this one, and I'll
see you in the next video. Thank you.
