Hi everyone. Welcome back. In this
module, we will learn about Google Ads,
particularly on lead and focused
businesses. This form of marketing is
also known as performance marketing,
where we drive performance for
businesses in the real world. In this
module we'll be taking a deep dive in
the foundational knowledge of Google
Ads with a special emphasis on how it
can be applied to lead generation
businesses, for example, insurance and
other ways, with a special emphasis on
how it can be applied where businesses
need leads or customer information to
drive further business results. Whether
you are new to Google Ads or looking to
refine your skills, this module will
give you a solid understanding of how
to use the platform to attract high
quality leads and drive business growth.
As we explore the Google Ads ecosystem,
our primary focus will be on lead
generation business concepts. Lead
generation is an essential part of
digital marketing as it helps
businesses convert potential customers
into actionable leads. Through this
module, you will learn how to
effectively leverage Google Ads to
capture those leads, whether it's
through search, display, or YouTube ads,
or even through newer ad formats like
Performance Max or PMax Google Ads
campaign. By the end of this module,
you will be able to learn. The
foundational basics of Google Ads, with
an emphasis on key components and
strategies that drive lead generation.
You could understand the different
types of Google Ads campaign and
understand the specific purposes. This
includes search ads which target users
effectively looking for specific
services, PMax campaign, which allows
for automated cross-channel ads,
display ads which are perfect for
reaching a broader audience, and
YouTube ads which provide video and
content marketing opportunities. This
module will not only enhance your
understanding of Google Ads, but also
helps you master the strategies that
can lead to meaningful conversions and
business success. So let's get started
and unlock the full potential of Google
Ads for lead generation.
