Hi again. Welcome to listen to the
Foundational basics. In this video, we
will be taking a deep dive to
understand the RTB model, or the
real-time auction bidding, and
exploring how it plays a crucial role
in the digital advertising landscape.
So firstly, what's an RTB or a
real-time bidding? RTB is a form of
programmatic advertisements where
digital ad spaces are bought and sold
instantly through automated auctions.
When a user visits a website or opens a
mobile app, an auction for the
available ad space takes place in real
time. Advertisers compete by placing
bids to show their ads to that specific
user. Within milliseconds, the system
selects the highest bid, and winning
advertiser's ad is displayed to the
publisher's website or the mobile app.
Let's explore why real time bidding
plays a key role in digital
advertisements. Real-time bidding makes
the buying and selling of digital ads
faster and more efficient. In
traditional advertising, advertisers
often spend a lot of time creating
requests for proposals or RFPs,
negotiating prices and finalising
insertion orders. With real-time
bidding, this entire process becomes
automated. Advertisers can quickly bid
for ad spaces and place their ads
instantly, giving them greater speed,
flexibility, and control over their
advertisement campaigns.
OK, now let's understand how this
real-time bidding actually works in a
concept accordance with the Internet ad
exchange that connects the ad network,
publisher, demand side platform, or
DSPs, or even the supply side platforms
which is SSPs, advertisers, and
agencies.
Let's see how programmatic
advertisement works behind the scenes.
In the simplest form, programmatic
advertisements relies on three key
technologies a demand side platform or
DSP, the supply side platform or SSP,
and finally, an ad exchange. These are
not physical machines but software
platforms that work together to
automate the buying and selling of
digital ad space.
Firstly, on demand side platform are
DSPs. They're used by buyers such as
advertisers and media agencies. These
platforms store information about the
type of ad inventory they want to
purchase. This includes a target
audience, campaign criteria, the
maximum price they're willing to bid.
On the other side, we have supply side
platforms or SSPs. They're used by
publishers or media owners who want to
sell their ad space on their website or
apps. SSPs manage the available ad
inventory, audience segments, visiting
the site, the minimum price the
publisher wants to receive. Between DSP
and SSPs is the ad exchange. This
platform acts as a digital marketplace
where ad inventory is auctioned. If the
available inventory matches the
criteria set by advertisers in their
DSP, those advertisers are entered into
the auction.
The advertiser with the highest bid,
relevancy, and ad quality wins the
auction, and their ad is displayed to
the user. Companies that provide the
technologies are often referred to as
the type of platforms such as DSP
providers, SSP providers, or ad
exchange providers. Although this
process sounds quite complex, but it
happens incredibly fast in the back end.
The auction begins the moment a user
opens a web page. Within that ad space
with a fraction of a second, the
winning ad is selected and displayed as
the page loads. This process is
entirely known as real-time bidding or
RTB. When a web page loads without an
ad, the page content appears, but the
ad space remains empty. When the same
page loads with an ad, a real-time
bidding process that takes place in the
background. Within a few milliseconds,
advertisers compete for their ad space,
and the winning ad is displayed almost
instantly as the page finally loads up.
