Today we are going to explore a demo
Google Analytics account to understand
the various reporting formats and what
are the other nitty gritties that it
provides. So here's a link of a demo
Google Analytics account that will be
provided in the beneath of your video.
So first, let's start exploring with
the real-time dashboard over here.
Again, this is a demo account, uh, it
pulls up some dummy data, but on the
home screen you can see the active
users, new users. And then average
engagement time, basically how much
time they're spending on your website
or the mobile app. It also talks about
active users in the last 30 minutes,
country-wise. Now if we kind of scroll
a little down below. It shows average
engagement time per active user, again,
a similar kind of a view, but in much
more depth. You'll see engaged sessions
per active user, uh, you know,
basically kind of a frequency of visit
on your website.
Now this is about the home section.
Again, you can click on any of those
things and take a deep dive. As I said,
kind of, it gives you a breakdown by
country, by new versus returning users,
so on and so forth. Let's go back.
Similarly, you can see a real-time data
as well.
Based on countries, based on wherever
this traffic is coming from, and what
they're actually doing on your website.
Are they're viewing your website or
engaging with your website, or clicking
on certain buttons, uh, so on and so
forth. With that, we'll move to
advertisements. So first thing we have
key event performance.
OK, so it basically talks about the
traffic that is coming, where they're
coming from. Is it like a direct
traffic that is basically someone
directly typing your website name on
the search bar. Then is it through paid
Google advertisement or organic search,
like on the organic listings of Google,
or some referral or cross-network
across other channels as well. Then
we'll move to attribution paths. Now
attribution is one of the important
concepts where it basically talks about
who the credit goes through. In
attribution path, first we'll look into
the path that it is falling, so some of
the traffic which is 100% direct, like
the people or the conversions that is
happening, which is by directly putting
your web address. Then we have page
search, where, you know, the Google
paid search, what percentage it
contributes to the total events, and so
on and so forth over here. Then key
attribution models, so there are
various attribution models which you
can change the model just by clicking
over here, last click, first, click
data driven. The important point to
note over here is, let's suppose from
Derek, if we use a last click
attribution model, you can see this is
almost like 1,465,000 key events that
have been recorded, but if we use a
data-driven attribution model, it's
almost like 1,479,000. There's a slight
difference because as we change the
attribution model. The credit also
changes. Then we'll move to conversion
performance again. It talks about all
conversions that came through direct
organic search, any referral or page
search network, whatever that was. So
these are very helpful reports when you
are running campaigns across Google Ads,
Me ads, and other platforms as well. It
gives you a consolidated view of your
marketing efforts in a one single
platform, and then uh we can create our
own reports over here, you can pick and
choose any template. Let's suppose if
you're an e-commerce company, you can
choose path exploration report. Since
now it's just loaded up, so let's
suppose you can track how many people
have started the session. How many
people have kind of viewed a particular
product page, so on and so forth. You
can define each of the event page and
names over here. Let's go back to
report. OK, uh, so in report, we will
come under life cycle and acquisition.
Let's start with the overview, or maybe
let's go to first user acquisition. OK,
it again gives you a split across the
channels, like the total users, new and
returning users. And again, it shows
average engagement time per active user,
so it basically gives you a snapshot of
new versus returning users.
Kind of broken down, uh, based on
platforms or channels that they have
came through.
Similarly, you can do a traffic
acquisition report as well.
Uh, again, very similar kind of view,
it gives you, uh, the session metrics
over here. So difference between user
acquisition and traffic is, a user is
kind of defined mostly based on their
IP addresses.
Our traffic is based on the number of
sessions that they are coming in, so
basically how they're interacting with
your website, irrespective of their IPs.
So yeah, uh, that's about, uh, Google
Analytics.
