Great to see you again. In the previous
session, we have learned how to track
campaign traffic using various
parameters and analyse it in Google
Analytics 4. Let's now look at how
marketeers understand which touch
points actually lead to a conversion.
In order to understand it, first we
need to understand how digital
advertisement ecosystem is currently
operating. In today's omni-channel yet
fragmented digital environment,
customers rarely convert just after one
interaction. In fact, according to
multiple researchers and surveys, it
has been found an individual often
reacts with about 7 different digital
touch points before making a product
purchase decision, or before becoming a
paying customer. This is where the
concept of attribution modelling
becomes important. It helps stitch
together data from these different
touch points. In one place to
understand how each interaction
contributes to your final conversion.
So the first category of attribution
modelling is known as rule-based.
Attribution models within the
rule-based category we have some common
models, which is first click, last
click, linear time decay, and
position-based attribution modelling.
Let's examine each of these rule-based
models in more detail. First, we have
this first touch attribution model
which gives credit to all the first
touch point a customer interacts. The
focus is on the touch point that
initially captured the customer's
attention and started their conversion
journey. For example, if the first
interaction is a Google ad, that ad
receives 100% of the credit for that
conversion. Other interactions like
filling a website form, attending a
webinar, or clicking an email, or even
a Facebook retargeting ad gets no
credit. In contrast, the last click
attribution model assigns all credit to
the final touch point before the
conversion. It emphasises interactions
that directly influences the decision
to buy. For instance, if a Facebook
retargeting ad is the last interaction.
It receives 100% of the conversion
credit, while previous touch points are
ignored.
Next, we have linear attribution model
which spreads credits equally across
all the touch points throughout the
customer journey. Every interaction is
considered equally important in
contributing to the conversion,
regardless of its position in
customer's journey path. If a customer
engages with 5 touchpoints Google Ads,
website form, webinar, email click, and
Facebook retargeting, each one gets the
same share, example, 20% credit for
each.
Next, we have time decay attribution.
Under time decay attribution, it gives
more credit to the touch points closer
to the conversion. Reflects the idea
that touch points nearer the purchase
decision, likely to have a stronger
impact on customer's choice. Earlier
interactions like Google Ads get less
wet, while later touch points like
email click or Facebook retargeting get
more.
Next, we have position-based
attribution, also called as U-shaped
attribution. The position-based
attribution model gives 40% credit to
each of the first and last touch points,
while the remaining 20% is split evenly
among the other touch points in between.
This model acknowledges the
significance of the initial and final
touch points while still valuing the
role of touch points in the middle of
the customer journey. For example, the
Google ad the first and the Facebook
retargeting ad at the last. Gets
roughly 30 to 40% credit, and the
middle touch points like website form,
webinar, and email click gets 10% each.
In order to understand the various
rule-based attribution modelling that
we have learned so far, we can take a
quick example of this very popular web
series called How I Met Your Mother
Style to understand and to recap all
the things that we have learned so far.
To make this clearer, we'll take the
help of these characters of this
particular famous web series. We will
have a quick recap of all the
rule-based attribution modelling we
have learned so far in a How I Met Your
Mother style. Don't worry if you don't
know about the characters. We will. Get
to them and we will try to use
attribution modelling over here. OK, so
over here we are talking about some of
the few characters. On the left, we
have Mr. Bani.
Then next to him we have Miss Robin,
then on the middle we have Mr. Ted. On
the right side we have Mr. Marshall,
and on the extreme rightmost we have Ms.
Lily.
Imagine Bernie gets introduced to Robin
by his friend Lily at a party. They
have a nice casual conversation over a
drink, and then they part their own
ways. Mr. Burney immediately starts to
like Miss Robin.
The next week, they again bumped into
each other.
This time it's at Marshall's party, the
conversations between them now were a
little longer. Mr. Bernie is mesmerised,
and he finally gathers the courage to
ask Miss Robin out on a date. And guess
what? Miss Robin says yes. Now Bernie
and Robin have been dating for a couple
of years. Mr. Bernie knows Robin is the
one, and now he wants to propose for
marriage, but now he's extremely
nervous. Now over here enters Mr. Ted.
Ted gives the courage to go and buy a
ring and open his heart to Robin.
Mr. Burney follows the advice, and he
does, and guess what? Miss Robin again
says yes this time. Now imagine we are
at Bernie's and Robin's wedding, and Mr.
Burney has to raise a toast for each of
his friends. Now the question is, who
should Mr. Burney give the credit for
their marriage. If Mr. Burney would
have used last click attribution model.
Ted would get the entire credit.
On the other hand, if Mr. Berney used
first click attribution model, Lily
would get the entire credit. Remember,
Lily was the first one to introduce
Bernie and Robin. Now imagine if Bernie
have used linear attribution, Lilly,
Mershel and Ted would get equal credit.
And if Bernie would have used time
decay attribution modelling, Ted would
get the maximum credit, followed by
Mershall and then finally Lilly. But
poor Bernie got confused and forgot to
thank anyone in his wedding speech. So
the key takeaway is, don't be like Mr.
Burney, know your attribution model.
Now let's look at the second category,
non-rule-based attribution modelling.
We have data driven attribution
modelling over here. Data driven
attribution modelling harness the
goodness of AI. Where the machine
learning model decides to give credits
to various channels based on real-time
signals. This allows the system to
learn from actual customer behaviour
and distribute credits across touch
points and more intelligently. With
this, you now have a clearer
understanding of various attribution
models, and I will see you on the next
video.
