Welcome back, learners, and let's now
begin module 11, which is all about
topic modelling. So what is topic
modelling, you may ask. So topic
modelling is an unsupervised machine
learning technique used to discover
hidden themes or topics in a collection
of documents. It is also used to
organise large volumes of text and to
understand what a corpus is all about
without manually going through it and
manually labelling it, right. A topic
typically represents a group of words
that frequently occur together.
Each word having a certain probability
within that topic or theme. For example,
there may be a text corpus with words
like software, data, system, network,
algorithm, and the algorithm may label
it as technology, right? So let's look
at this example. There is this text
document which has 3 different themes
or 3 different topics tourism,
facilities, and feedback. And what are
the words that are associated under
each topic? They are monuments,
adventure, hiking, scenic words like
these under the topic tourism. Then
there are words like restaurants,
transport, hotels,
under the theme facilities, and then
there are words like great, good, bad,
awesome, under the theme, feedback. So
this one document has 3 different
distinct topics, right? So you may ask
why do we need topic modelling. And to
let you know, topic modelling is very
widely used in industrial practise.
Modern applications generate a massive
amount of text and by minute and by
second. It can be news articles,
research papers, customer reviews,
social media posts,
manually going through all of these
text data and categorising them as per
their theme is impractical.
Therefore, we need a technology like
topic modelling which helps us to
summarise large documents collections,
identify recurring themes.
Group similar different documents
together as per their theme and support
downstream tasks like search and
recommendation. Topic modelling mainly
answers the question What are the main
themes present in this text corpus? Now
let's also quickly see some of the
differences between text classification
and topic modelling.
Text classification is a supervised
machine learning technique, whereas
topic modelling is an unsupervised
machine learning technique.
Because it is supervised, text
classification requires labelled data.
And on the other hand, topic modelling
being an unsupervised technique does
not require labelled data. Within text
classification, output classes are
predefined.
Within topic modelling, topics are
discovered automatically, without any
predefinitions. A popular example of
text classification is spam versus non
spam of emails and messages, right?
A popular example within topic
modelling is uncovering different
themes in news articles.
The key difference being. Text
classification assigns documents to
known categories, unlike topic
modelling. And topic modelling
discovers unknown structure within the
text data. Finally, let's see some
common use cases of topic modelling.
They are document clustering, where we
need to group similar different
documents based on their recurrent
themes. Exploitatively data analysis.
Which means to understand a new corpus
very quickly. We can run a topic
modelling on that and quickly get a
sense of what theme the text document
is talking about, trend analysis, which
tracks how topics evolve over time.
Information retrieval, which improves
search by topic-based indexing. Finally,
content recommendation, which suggests
articles or documents with similar
topics. And that's all for this video.
I'll see you in the next one. Thank you.
