Welcome back learners. In the last
video, we saw how we developed our
front end and the main function for
running the application. Let me quickly
give you a recap. So we did some state
management, then this was the function
for the first page tender. The setup
page Then the render quiz function for
the 2nd page, which was the quiz page,
and then render results function for
the results page. So these were the 3
main pages of her application, and then
the main function for running the
application, right?
So let's now, in this video, quickly
run our application and see how
everything flows.
So
So I hope you're excited for that. Let
me quickly pull a new terminal. First,
I will have to activate my virtual
environment, so I will type Konda
activate and the environment name which
is Quiz Genius.
Perfect. Now I will travel to the Quiz
genius_AI directory, which is this,
which contains our main application
file, which is app.pi. So for running a
streamlet application, the command is
streamlet run, whatever the file name
is. So the file name for us is app.py.
So what we'll type is streamlet run
app.pi. Let's press enter.
And perfect. Our app is loading.
OK, awesome. The app is loaded, so this
was the first page, which was a form
that accepted user inputs. So let me
type any subject. This is the slider to
select the number of questions, and
this is the dropdown for selecting
difficulty. Let's generate the quiz
with this button, generate quiz.
So here's the message generating a quiz.
It may take a few seconds. So here are
3 questions. This is the name of the
quiz that is also generated by the LLM.
OK, perfect. Let's select any. Random
answers
And submit answers.
Perfect. The score is 1 out of 3, and
here is the feedback on all the 3
questions. This is finally the last
button. Take another quiz. If you click
here, it will take you back to the
first page. So great, everything works,
right? So let me quickly correlate this
with our application. And show you
what's what so that streamle starts
making much more sense to you. OK, so
this is our app.pile. Let me close or
collapse the state management. OK, so
page one. So you see, firstly, That we
have the header here.
Configure your quiz.
Right?
This Quiz Genius AI generate AI powered
quizzes is coming from the main
function.
Quiz Genius AI generate AI powered
quizzes, right? So this was the title,
this was the caption, and then a
divider, right? So divider is this line.
Now let's travel back to the first page.
OK, so we start with the header,
configure your quiz, which is this.
Then, then we open a form, ST. form,
which is named as quiz setup form. The
title of the form is topic with the
emoji, then a placeholder with this
text, example Python programming, World
War, etc. Then there are two columns.
These are the two columns, number of
questions and difficulty, the number of
questions, difficulty. Number of
questions is a slider, so this is a
slider, right? So, let's select 5, and
then difficulty, let's select easy.
Then we have the form submit button,
which, which is called as generate quiz,
right, generate quiz. So you see it
says use container with if I make it
false.
And I save this and I click here on
rerun, so you see, this is the default
width of the button. So therefore, it
looks good if you use the container
width.
All right, so this was our page one.
Now let's click. Please enter a topic
to generate a quiz. Perfect. We have
the error message here as well. Now,
let's select science, for example.
Generating a quiz, this may take a few
seconds, which is this with the spinner,
right? Perfect. So this is our 2nd page.
So let's come here. Let me close this.
So This is Render quiz again, this. And
the divider is coming from the main
function, if you remember, let me
scroll down and show it to you.
These 3 things, right? Now, let's go
back to the 2nd page.
Perfect. So the header is this emoji
and the quiz name that is LLM generated.
So this, that's why it was dynamic. The
length of the question is also dynamic,
so 5
questions, select your answers and
submit, right? Now we open up a form.
And then a for loop for all the
questions. So you see, let me show you
one. So queue and then number of
questions, then this full stop. So this
queue number of question and the full
stop, and then the question. All of
that is dynamically produced on the
front end, right? Then you have the
st.radio, which is these radio buttons.
So let's select any.
Right? So you selected that.
Now, ST divider, which is this, then
you have two columns. With the width of
3 is to 1. So, first is a button called
submit answers, and second is a button
called back. Let me also use. Container
with your.
Right, I'll save this and I'll rerun.
So you see, this looks much better now.
Perfect. OK, let me also
OK, I've already selected all, so.
I was not able to show you the error
message.
But anyhow, the third page, let me now
collapse this. Here we come to render
results. Again, these three components
are coming from the main function, the
top title, the subtitle, and the
divider. Then we have the score. So
check this out.
Yeah, this one. Sorry, I got. Lost. So
since my score was 40% correct.
So this emoji, which is here. And then
score And then score upon total. So you
see, this is here as the header. Then
the subheader says, good effort, keep
studying with the percentage. Correct.
Then comes the detailed review, which
is dynamically generated with the.
Right response and the feedback.
Perfect.
I hope this makes a lot more sense now,
and this is the final button. Take
another quiz. So I can click here and
this will take me back to the home page
or the first page. Right, so I hope
this makes a lot more sense now and
that you're excited to also implement.
Great looking front end for your own
applications as well, not only just for
this application, for your own
application as well, right? In the next
video, we will quickly revisit our
version one of the project architecture,
and we will see and update that, right?
So I hope you're excited for that. I'll
see you in the next video. Thank you.
