Welcome back learners. Now that we've
built the main logic for our
application, let's build the
application runner. Now that we have
implemented our quiz generation logic,
let's now also implement the
application runner logic, right? So
this is the main logic for the app.
So, firstly, I'm importing time.
Then I'm defining a function called run
quiz app, right, so by the name you can
understand that this is the main
application. Then I'm taking an input
from the user on the topic that I need.
If you want to hard code it, you can
hard code it this way. I've added it as
a comment. However, this will make it
dynamic.
Some fail-safe for error handling. The
step 2 is generate quiz, the function
that we defined earlier, generate quiz,
right? So we will run this quiz on this
topic, right? And we will capture the
response here. Again, some fail-safe
for error handling. Now step 3, we will
begin the game for the end user, right?
So let's print some starting things, so
quiz data, quiz title, whatever, right,
some demarcations. Let's define the
score as 0. So this will be our base
score, and for the 3 questions that the
user will answer, if it is correct, we
will add a plus 1, right? And if it is
not correct, we will do nothing, right?
So this is for that. Now I'm also
capturing total as the length of the
number of questions. So for example, if
tomorrow you want to extend it to 5
questions, I have made it dynamic for
you. You will not have to hardcode it,
right?
Now, for every question, so for queue
inquis data questions, so for every
question, what do I need? Right, I need
User's answer, so I need to capture the
input from the user, so A, B, C, D,
whatever the answer is, right, and I
will normalise it as well. Cool.
If the user answer matches the correct
option, then print that it is correct
and append the score with plus one,
right? However, if the user's answer
does not match the correct option in
the sense it is incorrect, then you
will print wrong. The answer was this
whatever the correct option was, right?
Then print the explanation.
Great, perfect. Finally, I'm adding a
gap of 1 2nd for some pause between the
next question, right, so that the user
gets a breather.
And this is coming from the Time
package.
Now, once this loop has been run for
all the questions, which is 3 in our
case. I will print the final score,
right? OK, so now the final step, right,
this is what I want to show to the user,
right? So final score will be score
upon total. What are these variables?
This and this, right? So score will
have the number of answers that were
answered correctly, and total will have
all the total number of questions,
right? So in case all answers are
correct, so if score equals equals
total, right? Let me add it here, all
answers answers were. Correct. Print,
perfect score, you are a master, right?
You can define it as you want. If the
score is greater than 0, right? So
maybe 1 was correct or 2 were correct,
right?
Print, good job, keep studying, right?
And else, which means all are incorrect,
just print Better luck next time, right?
I hope all of this makes sense.
Let's run this.
Right?
Our function is ready.
Also, another tip, if you want to
understand this, right, quiz data, what
is quiz data questions, what are
questions in quiz data, right? So what
are queue options, just look at this.
Look at this. This is our output, right?
So quizda.stion means everything inside
this key variable, right? And queue
options means all of this, right? So if
you want to understand this function
further, just relate it to this output.
OK, so that was a quick tip from my end.
Creep. I think we've run this function.
Let me run it again just for surety.
Great. So our function, the main
application runner, is ready. In the
next video we will use it to demo the
final application. I hope you're
excited for what's next to follow. I'll
see you in the next video. Thank you.
