In our previous video, We established
that RAM is the secret sauce to Spark's
speed, but how Spark actually manages
its operations to avoid touching the
disc. In this video we'll look at 2
slides to understand how Spark
minimises disc rewrite cycles. Let's
look at the first slide, the DG,
directed acyclic graph. Unlike Hadoop
MapReduce, which sees a job as a rigid
map shuffle reduce sequence, Spark
builds a logical plan of the entire
data pipeline. Because Spark knows the
entire series of transformation you
want to perform before it even start.
It can optimise the workflow. It looks
for ways to pipeline operations
together in a single stage. Keeping the
data in memory for as many steps as
possible, without ever needing to
materialise or write to the disc.
This leads us to the two key features
of Spark on the next slide, which is
lazy evaluation and persistence. In
Spark, transformations are lazy. This
means if you tell Spark to philtre a
data set and then map it, Spark doesn't
actually do anything.
It just adds those instructions to the
dag. It only executes the code when an
action, like saving to a file or
showing the count, is called.
Then this allows Spark to combine
multiple steps into one efficient pass
over the data. So Spark intelligently
decides to arrange each step, each
iteration, the way they want, and then
they prune the dag to make it more
efficient. The second feature is
persistence or catching.
In Hadoop model, if you needed to use
the same data set for 2 different tasks.
You have to read it from the disc twice.
In Spark, you can explicitly tell the
system to persist a data set in memory.
Once it is loaded and transformed, it
stays in the RAM of the worker noises.
Any subsequent operations can then pull
that data directly from memory
instantly by combining an intelligent
execution plan with the ability to lock
data in RAM. Spark virtually eliminates
the constant disc chatter that slows
down traditional batch processing.
Next. We'll put these theories to the
test by looking at a performance
benchmark, Hadoop versus Park in a Ky
means algorithm. And I'll see you in
the next class. Till then, happy
learning.
