Hello everyone, welcome back to module 11 of Artificial Neural Networks. In this video, we will study activation saturation. In the previous video, we saw how ReLU neurons can die by becoming inactive. In this demo, we will study what saturation mean, how sigmoid and tannage saturate, and why saturation kills gradients.
As we run this demo, focus on how activation values cluster near the limits. So let's start with the demo. We will import the standard libraries. Next, we will create our dataset. Now here we want to compare sigmoid and tannage activations. So for that, we are defining one common architecture. And then to monitor the activation saturation, we know that for sigmoid, saturation happens near values
0 or 1. And for tannage, it happens near -1 or 1. We define this activation hook function. Now let's look at sigmoid saturation. Let's try to train the model simply first. First, we will try to see the activation distribution without the saturation. Let's look at how the normal case looks like. So in the normal case, this graph shows us that all the activation values are between 0.2 to 0.8. And it's a well-designed curve, which is coming up here.
happens near minus 1 or 1, we define this activation hook function. Now let's look at sigmoid saturation. Let's try to train the model simply first. First we will try to see the activation distribution without the saturation. Let's look at how the normal case looks like. So in the normal case, this graph shows us that all the activation values are between 0.2 to 0.8 and it's a well designed curve which is coming up here. Now to see the saturation
behavior, what we are doing is we are forcing large reactivations to induce the saturation. So we will apply this function on the sigmoid model so that we can induce this behavior. Now let's see how this graph changes. So now you can see this graph is actually around 0 and 1, very minimal number of values in between. So this shows us the saturation behavior. Now let's look at the similar case for tan h activation function.
Here again we will apply the same function. Let's train the model and look at the activation distribution. So in the case of tan h, we can see that values are around minus 1 and 1. Now the key question to answer is why saturation kills the gradients. In saturated regions, both the sigmoid and tan h derivative are close to 0. As a result, gradients shrink, learning slows or stops and early layers
stop updating. Now what is the difference between saturation and dead reluce? Dead reluce output exact zeros, saturated sigmoid or tan h output constants, both lead to near zero gradients and both silently reduce the learning capacity of the models. Now let us summarize the main points of this video. Sigmoid and tan h can saturate. Saturation clusters activations near limits. Saturated
Saturation activations kill the gradients. Activation diagnostics reveal hidden training failures. In the next video, we will see how to track and monitor activation distributions during the training. Thank you.
