Hi, everyone. Welcome back to the labs
for module 8.
Here, we are uh moving from uh
optimising our model's format to
optimising its uh very substance, OK?
So in the last module, we standardise
our model to ONNX uh format, right? And
we try to
Boost our performance
with the next run time.
But the question here is, what if we
need our model to be even smaller and
uh faster, right? So this is where uh
model compression comes in. So, the
story for this lab is simple. We need
to deploy our image classification
model, but uh our target environment
has a constraint, OK? Maybe it's a
mobile phone with a limited storage and
battery or a surless uh function with a
tight memory limit. If you remember, uh,
the last model we used, it, the size of
that model was uh around uh 45 MB,
right? So, it might be too big or too
small. So in the first uh script, we
will apply a powerful and easy to use
uh Compression technique called uh uh
dynamic quantization, and our goal is
to convert the model weight from 32 bit
floating points number to much smaller
8 bit integers and uh then create a new
compressed uh model file, OK? So before
we compress anything, we need our
starting point. So, I have created, uh,
uh, this script.
Set up baseline.py. So that recreates
the artefact from our previous lab, and,
uh, first, it will download a
pre-trained uh resonate 18 model and
then save the Pythor checkpoint and
export it to the standard uh UNNX
format, OK? Uh, so now, uh, OK. So
let's, uh, run this script. I've
already installed the dependencies, I
think. So let's uh
And again, you can find all the details
over here, how to do that.
So first, we are gonna run, uh, set up
a baseline. PY, OK? So let's execute it.
And now, if you look in our model
directory,
We have uh ResMed.OX.
Model created over here, right?
So, this is our FP 32 model or 32-bit
uh floating point model. Let's uh check
its size. So if you see here,
Uh, this is 44.67 MB. So this is the
model size. And this is our baseline.
So every optimisation we do will be
measured again this uh this number. So
now let's see if uh is it possible to
make this significantly smaller without
destroying its accuracy. So, let's uh
find out. So, before that, let's say,
what, what exactly is uh quantization?
OK. So At its core, it's about using a
simple, less precise number format to
represent the weights in our neural
network. OK. So, our current model uses
32 bit floating point, uh, this model.
Right? And think of these uh as very
precise uh decimal uh numbers capable
of representing a huge uh range of
values, OK? And uh so, what does
quantization tell? Quantization says,
uh, do we really need all that
precision? What if we could represent
the same information with 8 bit
integers, which are whole number from
Uh, -28 to
127. So this is like uh taking a high
resolution photograph, right? And, uh,
saving it as a lower quality like uh in
JPEG format. So, basically, you lose uh
some fine-grained details, but the main
picture is still there.
Still, you can't see much difference,
right? So, the effect we are hoping uh
here is a 4X uh reduction in this model.
Let's see. Usually, uh, this happens,
uh, because we are going from 32 bits
to 8 bits per weight. OK. So we also
expect it to be faster on CPU because
integer math is generally much faster
for processors than floating point
maths, right? So, the risk, of course,
is a potential drop in accuracy, which
we will measure uh later, right?
So now we have uh another script over
here. Uh, L11X.P. OK.
So now, for the practical part, let's
uh Uh, see this script, what it's
basically doing. So, here, you will be
amazed at how simple this is. The ONNX
runtime library provide a utility
called uh quantized dynamic, OK? And we
simply give it our input model path,
right?
Uh, input model.
And uh that is our resonate 18 uh
resonate 18.ONX and a path for the new
uh model. So this is uh the output path,
OK. And the most important parameter is
weight type. So, this is uh uh
important uh parameter where we are
passing, uh, 8 bet and diesel.
Right? Um, and this tells the tool to
find all the floating point weights in
the model graph and convert them into,
uh, 8-bitten teaser. OK. So, let's try
to run this.
And there it is. Look at the output.
The original 44 MB model is now just uh
11 MB, right? And that's a nearly
perfect 4X reduction, right? Exactly we
predicted. And we have just uh
compressed our model by 75% with a
single function call, right? And the
script also does a quick uh sanity
check. You can see over here. Uh, just
to make sure the new ResNN 18, that is
uh FP8 format model. Uh, can be loaded
by ONX, uh, runtime and can produce an
output. So, this confirms, uh, we have
a valid, uh, renewable model, but, uh,
is it still accurate? And uh is it uh
Actually faster.
That's what we will find out in the
next script.
