Hello to all of you, my name is Dr. Hemant Dattar and we are in the course Machine Learning. We are in the module 1, Introduction of Machine Learning and this video is on Supervised Learning, Learning from Labeled Data. So the learning objective of this video is, we are going to first define what supervised learning is and we will understand the core concepts of supervised learning.

Then we will look into the two different types of supervised learning algorithms, classification and regression. Then we will look into the process of training and testing a classification model and we will also look into some real world applications of classification and regression. So let's start right away.

So we are in the course Machine Learning. If we break this word, there are two sub words here, machine and learning. So basically what we are trying to say here is, machine is trying to learn.

Now there can be two fundamental approaches where machine can learn. In machine learning, there are two fundamental types of approaches how machine is learning. One is called supervised learning, one is called supervised learning and the second one is called unsupervised learning.

So machine learning can broadly be divided into two types of learning, supervised learning and unsupervised learning. Supervised learning is also called as prediction methods. The basic idea is we learn so that we can do prediction.

So the goal of supervised learning algorithm is to do some sort of prediction of unknown values. For example, weather prediction system. I want to predict whether there will be rainfall tomorrow or not.

So rainfall yes or no is a supervised learning. Rainfall prediction is a supervised learning problem. Here we are building a prediction model.

So here in supervised learning, the machine learns from the example where the correct answer is also known. So the learning in prediction methods, the learning is all done based on the correct answer we have provided in the past. So we have provided the data and the correct answers.

Correct answers are also known as class labels. So in supervised learning, we are given original data and the correct answers also known in class label and the machine learns the relationship between data and the correct labels through a function called as F and that is what we call it as machine learning model or a classification model or a prediction model or a supervised learning model. So this F is a model which is a prediction model which finds the relationship between data and the correct label.

Another way the machine can learn is called unsupervised learning. In unsupervised learning, another name is called descriptive methods. In descriptive methods, we are not doing any prediction.

We are trying to find interesting patterns, human interpretable patterns and structure in the data. So in descriptive methods, we are not doing any prediction. In unsupervised learning, we are not doing any prediction.

We are just trying to find human interpretable patterns and structure in the data and in this machine learning explores the data without correct answers. So here we are only given the data. We are not given correct answers or class label.

What we do is we just find structure pattern in the data whether two points are same or not, whether two points are different or not. These things can be understood or can be learned using descriptive methods or unsupervised learning. So in this video, we will focus on supervised learning, supervised learning algorithms or models or strategy methods which are used to do some sort of prediction for the future.

So what is supervised learning? Supervised learning is one of the most common methods in machine learning and here learning is done using labeled data. Correct answers also known as correct label. So label data, correct answers, correct label all are same.

So what we have is the original data and the correct labels or class labels, correct answers or class labels. Label data consists of training examples where each example is a pair of input features along with the desired output. Also known as label or target.

So we have data and the class label. For example, a very simple example can be weather prediction system. In weather prediction system, I can have what was the temperature, what was the humidity and it rained or not.

So class label is rain, yes or no. So let suppose on day 1 there was rain, day 2 there was no rain, day 3 there was rain. So this is my correct label.

This is one of the features that describe the data. Another feature describes the data. So this is called as x and this is called as y. So in the data, you have some portion which is the original data and which is called as x and you also have y which is called as correct answer or class label.

The classification model or any supervised learning model build a function f that finds the relationship between x and y. So a simple analogy of supervised learning is that when student learns from textbook and answer the question. So input is question and the answers are output. So basically if you have done RD Sharma, so you have a question, then you solve it and the correct answer is written at the back.

So whatever answer you get, you can check it from the back. So you learn, if you do 100 questions, you learn how to solve a question and you verify with the correct answer at the back. So this is called as supervised learning.

You have data and the corresponding class label and then when you build a model so that you can do prediction in the future, this is called supervised learning. So supervised learning is further divided into two types of algorithms. One is called classification, another one is called regression.

When we predict, so supervised learning is essentially used for prediction and prediction is done based on data and the class labels. The original data should consist of original data and the class label. So in class label, in classification, the class labels are categorical in nature, finite in nature.

The number of items I can predict are finite, are fixed, are divided into categories, then it is called as classification problem. For example, weather prediction system. I was predicting whether it is going to rain or no rain, yes or no, rain or no rain.

So this is a classification problem. I am building a model which can predict whether it is going to rain tomorrow or no rain tomorrow. Cheat detection system, whether the customer has cheated, not cheated.

So I am predicting one of the two classes. So this is a classification problem. So classification is a type of supervised learning.

In supervised learning, the basic idea is we are doing prediction. If we are predicting finite number of values, fixed number of values or fixed number of classes or categories, then it is called as classification problem. So a simple example can be, I have two images, I build a ML model or a machine learning model which can predict whether the image contains dog or cat.

So in this case, the model is predicting cat, so most likely I must have pushed this picture. So maybe when I push this picture, the machine learning model should predict it is a dog. So in classification, we do prediction, but we predict fixed number of values.

On the other hand, in regression, the output can be continuous or numerical in nature. So when I am doing petrol price prediction, oil price prediction, gold price prediction, stock price prediction, all these are regression problem. So when I am doing petrol price prediction, petrol price can be 100, 101, 102, 101, 101, 102 and so on.

There can be infinite number of values. So supervised learning, I am doing prediction, but if I can, I am predicting infinite number of values, my model can predict infinite number of values, then it is called as regression problem. So what is my vehicle average? It can be 10, it can be 10.5, it can be 11, it can be 20, it can be 500 and so on.

So in supervised learning, it is divided into two parts, classification and regression. In classification, what we have is set of training data, set of data. Data is defined with the help of attributes.

So if you remember, I have been taking this example again and assuming this is my structure data in a table form. The data point is explained with the help of some attributes. So this is data point 1 explained with the help of attribute A, attribute B and attribute C. In classification, there would be another attribute, another column, which is called class labeled.

So there is another special attribute, which is called as class labeled or target, which is what we want to predict. So in supervised learning, in classification, the original data will consist of both data X and the corresponding Y. When we build this model and we deploy it in real world, what we will be given is X and then we have to predict Y based on the X which is given to us. So the goal is to build a model that takes a newer data or unseen record and assign a class label as accurately as possible.

So a simple classification problem can be cheat detection system, whether a particular customer has cheated or not. So someone has given me a tabular data with three attributes, attribute 1, attribute 2 and attribute 3. And there is another attribute, attribute 4. So customer 1 is defined with the help of attribute 1, attribute 2 and attribute 3. So customer number 1 refund was yes, marital status was single and taxable income was 125. There is another class label, another attribute, which is defining customer number 1, which is whether he has cheated in the past or not.

So he has not cheated. Similarly, customer number 2, customer number 3 and so on. So in classification, we have set of attributes.

One of the attributes is the class label, right? One of the attributes is the target label. So once we have built a classification, this is my training data. Once we have learned the model, we have built a model.

In real world, user will be given me X, only attribute, this is my X and this is my Y. So user will be giving me X and then I have to do prediction for that X, right? So particularly this case, right? What would be the prediction? What would be the prediction here? What would be the prediction here? So this is a classification problem. Why this is classification? So the number of classes here are finite and which is 2, no and yes. I can predict 3 classes.

I can predict 4 classes, right? So all these will fall under classification. So in classification, we start with the original data, right? X and the corresponding Y. It's a huge data set with a lot of data points. First, we split the data into two parts, training data and test data.

In training data, it is used to build the model. Once I have built the model, I am going to use test data to check the performance of the model. In the test data, actually I know what is the class label, but I forget about the class label for some time, right? And use this machine learning model to do the predictions.

Whatever prediction is done, I can match with the original label. If the original label is matching, my model is good. Otherwise, my model is of poor quality.

So your original data is divided into training data and test data. Original data or training data, basically training data is used to build the model and once the model is built, you want to check the performance of the model on the testing data set, right? So in testing data set, you forget about the class label for some time and let machine learning model do the prediction. Classification model do the prediction and then whatever prediction the model has done and whatever were the original labels are checked, if both are matching, then your model was of good quality.

Otherwise, the model was of bad quality, right? So we train the model on the training data set. Then sometimes we do validation as well. And then finally, we are going to confirm the result on the test data set.

So in this case, right, we had x consists of three attributes a1, a2, a3. And what we want to predict is whether the customer has cheated or not, right? So in training phase, we build a model based on the training data, original data divided into two parts, one used for training, one used for testing, right? This is more of a representative breakage, but we do sampling with replacement to build, right, without replacement to build training data and test data. And on training data, we build the model on test data, we actually test our model.

So this is testing done on testing data. Then we check whether the prediction ball is matching with the original labels or not. If it is not, then the model is of bad quality.

Now let's see a few real world examples of classification. We have seen that in data pre-processing goals, but let me quickly revise, right? Credit card fraud detection. So when we are talking about fraud detection, so think about it.

I am swiping my credit card at a point of sale or using credit card on for doing an online transaction. Online transactions are fraudulent in nature. Now bank actually wants to improve their performance, right? Improve their fraud detection because whenever there is a fraud detection, bank gets a bad name, right? So whenever you swipe your credit card, banks check whether this transaction looks like a genuine transaction or fraudulent one.

If it is a genuine transaction, the bank will allow it to pass. If it looks like a fraudulent transaction, it will stop the transaction or it will push for additional authentication measures to verify whether this is again a fraudulent transaction or a genuine transaction. So credit card fraud detection, the goal is to predict and prevent fraudulent credit card transaction.

So think about it. Whenever you swipe your credit card or whenever you log into email from anywhere in the world, basically there is a fraud detection engine, which is ML model, which is sitting in the middle. Whenever you do any transaction based on the previous logins, based on your previous transaction, it checks, it has built a model.

It checks whether the transaction or login looks like a genuine one or a fraudulent one. So basically whenever you do any transaction, write new transaction, it will be checked again using machine learning model. If my machine learning model is saying it is a fraudulent transaction, this fraudulent transaction will be blocked.

Otherwise it will be allowed. Direct marketing is again an example of a classification problem. So here I'm predicting two classes, finite number of values, fraudulent or genuine.

So if I'm predicting finite number of values, then it is called as classification problem. Direct marketing is another example of classification. Churn detection is another example, whether the customer is going to stay on my platform or leave the platform.

Again, a classification problem, stay or leave. So in this, my ML model is expected to predict whether a customer is going to likely to stay or leave the platform. So again, I'm predicting two values here.

That is why it is again a classification problem. Then we also have in supervised learning, something called, we have classification, we have regression. In regression, we are predicting infinite number of values.

In regression, we predict continuous value output. So what is the petrol price tomorrow? 101 or 105? It can be 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, infinite number of values. So in regression also, we are predicting values, but we are predicting infinite number of values or we are predicting continuous values.

So the goal is to predict numerical values, which can be infinite in nature. For example, what would be the sales in next year? What would be the temperature tomorrow? Humidity tomorrow? What would be the stock price tomorrow? So all these are, we are doing prediction, but we are doing predicting a continuous value, a numerical value. In classification, we predict a class label.

In regression, we predict a continuous value. So in classification and regression, both are supervised learning algorithm. In classification, we predict categorical or discrete values, fixed number of values.

In regression, we can predict numerical or continuous value. So in the question is which class, whether it is going to rain, no rain, cancer, no cancer, fraud, no fraud. So which class is the question? And in regression, the question is how much? How much will be the petrol price tomorrow? How much will be the gold price tomorrow? How much will be the stock price tomorrow? An example of classification can be, so is this image contain dog or cat? Two classes.

What would be the price of the house tomorrow? Regression problem. House price can be 1 lakh, 50 lakh, 1 crore, so on. We measure classification models, performance of classification models using accuracy, precision, recall, etcetera, etcetera.

We will see that in module 3. We measure the performance of regression systems using error, mean square error, sum of square error, etcetera, etcetera. So therefore, in this video, we looked into, we understood what is supervised learning and two different types of supervised learning, classification and regression. We will continue in the next video.

Take care. Bye bye.

(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.)