Hi everyone. Welcome to the labs for
module 10. Uh, in this lab, we are
going to see how to build a data
pipeline and why they are, uh, backbone
of, uh, production ML system, OK? So,
So far, we have uh talked a lot about
models, but, uh, as the saying goes, G
is in, garb is out. So here, the system
that uh feed our models with high
quality, timely data are just as
important as the models uh themselves,
right? So, these systems are data
pipelines. And a data pipeline is an
automated process that takes raw data
from various sources.
Then, uh, clean it, transform it, and
uh loads it into a destination where it
can be used for uh training or, or
could be used for analytics or for
survey, right? So it's the circulatory
system of any MLOps uh platform. So, in
this lab, what we are gonna see, we are
going to Build a mini data pipeline,
but uh before we can process data, we
need uh data to process, right?
And if we talk about common challenge
in development is uh getting a
realistic uh stream of data. So our
first step is to build a simulator that
uh mimics uh new data arriving each day,
and, uh, this is a crucial pattern for
building and testing pipelines, uh,
robustly before they even touch live
production, OK? So, for that, uh, I
have created, uh, again, this directory,
lab 10. You can find all the
A script over here. Let's open to me.
And uh here we have all the scripts. So
first, we are gonna see uh simulate
dailydata.py OK? So, here, our first
task is to generate a base data set
that we can then split into daily
chunks, OK? Uh, and, uh, we're using
Numpi, random default RNG.
Uh, with a fixed, uh, seed. And this is
a small but important detail for
reproducibility. So it ensured that
every time we run this script, we get
the exact same random data which is
essential for debugging and consistency
during testing, OK.
So, next, uh, we define the shape of
our data, that is 5 days.
OK. Uh, with, uh, 10 records per day.
And then we use uh Panda's uh date
range here to create our daily time
stamps, OK? And the core of the
generation happened in this loop.
OK. And for each day, we create 10
records.
Right.
So rows we have here are 10, and for
each day we're creating uh uh 10 rows
for 5 days, right? So we have here a
nested loop. So each record is a
dictionary containing our event data,
uh, and, uh, let's uh look uh. At each
field. So here we have a day. This is
just an index, OK? Then we have the
time stamp. We create a realistic time
stamp by taking the base day and uh
adding a random number of minutes so
they simulate the event during
throughout the day. Then we have the
customer ID, uh, amount, and, uh, label.
These are our feature and target
columns generated uh randomly. This
mimics the event data a real model
would be trained on, right? And finally,
we load our data into a data frame, and
this base TF now represents our entire
historical data for the five-day period,
OK?
So now that we have our base data set,
we need to simulate the daily arrival
part, right? So we are going to split
the single data frame into multiple CSV
files, one for each day, right? Uh, so
we have 5 days over here.
So the magic happens with the group by
function. Uh, or the group by operation.
This pandas function is, uh, incredibly
powerful. It, uh, iterates, uh, through
our data frame, gives us a mini data
frame which we call group for each
unique value in the day column, OK? And,
uh, inside this loop, for each day's
group, we construct a file path like,
uh, day one, day 2, and so on. Then we
use the two CSV. Uh, method to write
that, uh, group's, uh, data to its own
file. And here, we said the index, uh,
equal to files because, uh, we don't
need to write the data frame, uh,
internal index, uh, to the file, right?
So, This script is uh Completed over
here. Now, let's uh execute this uh
Python file. So let's go inside the lab
10.
Yeah, now execute uh this file. And 10
and 1 similar data.
Dot uh PY simulate daily data. P. OK?
That's execute it. So if you notice
here, we don't have any data right now
inside uh data and10 format.
Now, if you look inside this.
Data and then there they are. They have
uh successfully simulated a production
scenario where a new data file arrive
each day,
right? So, day 1, day 2, you can see
over here. So this simple setup in the
foundation for the test of our work is
uh uh in this uh module. We now have a
predictable, reputable source of new
data to build our injection pipeline,
right? So if you see inside it, so
that's what we expected, right? D
timestamp, customer ID amount, and the
label. That's uh random generated data.
Yeah. Now let's move to the next step.
