All right, learners. Welcome to this
video where we will go through Google
AI Studio, right? This is the platform
where not only you can test the LLMs
provided by Google Gemini, but also get
your API key so that you can use Gemini
models in your own applications, right?
So let's go through Google AI Studio,
right? So earlier when it began, Google
AI Studio used to be just, you know,
testing for the language capabilities.
However, now Google has really expanded
the capabilities of Google AI Studio.
You can generate videos. You can
generate. Images, you can also do white
coding and build your own apps, right?
However, we will stick to our use case
of natural language generation, right?
So let's get started. So let's go
through the homepage, right? That was a
quick video.
You can try the models, wipe code
applications, get your API keys, right,
how we saw. So all the Google's AI
models are present in Google AI Studio,
be it language models or image models
or video models, right?
This is the build feature within Google
AI Studio, which allows you to wipe
code.
And these are the monitoring
capabilities of Google AI Studio so
that you can monitor your API usage,
right? Because these models often come
with a cost.
And then, of course, there is the SDK.
Which is Gen AI from Google, right,
which allows you to run Google Gemini
LLMs in your code, right?
OK. So let's get started now. On the
top right, you will see this get
started button. Click over here.
Click on the email that you want to log
in with, right?
I will enter my password and we are in.
Great. So this is the Google AI Studios
playground, right? What this does is it
gives you a chat interface very similar
to the Gemini interface or the chat GBT
interface, any LLM application that
you're familiar with, right? So you can
enter your prompt here.
And just Hit control enter and it will
send the prompt to the LLM and generate
an output. So I entered, tell me a joke
and the output is, why don't scientists
trust atoms because they make up
everything. OK, funny, yeah, funny
enough, right. What this is, which says
thoughts, is actually a chain of
thoughts.
Which basically shows you the steps
that the LLM has taken to generate your
application, right?
So it was a simple step that they
created crafting a dad joke. I'm
working on a short punchy dad joke, da
da yada y, right? If this would have
been a
complex prompt which required step by
step thinking, you would have seen
multiple different thoughts here, right.
OK, great.
Now, let me refresh this. So I will
create a new chart.
If you remember from our earlier
discussion, single term versus multi-t
conversations, right?
So let's test that out. So, Who is the
president of
United States.
So you see, the current president of
the United States is Joe Biden. He is
the forty-sixth president and assumed
office.
Right, 2 things here.
It said Joe Biden. However, we all know
that the current president is Donald
Trump. The model responded with Joe
Biden because at the cutoff date. So
till the date which The model has been
trained on, so that's the cutoff date,
right? So by the cutoff date, I'm sure
the data that the LLM was provided for
training in that data, Joe Biden must
have been the president of the United
States right at that time, right? Now,
let me ask another question.
What is age?
And it says Joe Biden is 81 years old.
He was born on November 20, 1942, right?
So when Let's expand this.
So when I asked what is his age, I did
not personally provide a context. Whose
age do I want, right? However, in the
courts you can see, calculate Biden's
age, right? So what it has done is it
has collected this prompt for the user
query and the response.
Which was passed while processing this
query, right? So the LM had context. So
this is a multi-tone conversation,
right? As far as our scope for this
course goes, we will focus more on
single term conversation. OK, so this
was a quick overview of single term
versus multi-term conversations. Let me
refresh this.
Like Now, these, these cards show you
what are the features of Google AI
Studio. We are in playground. Let's see
what's there on the right, right? So
here you can select the model that you
want. Currently, Gemini 3 flash preview
has been selected. You can select the
newer models or the older models or the
lighter models, etc.
System instructions. Now this is the
same as system prompt. You can provide
a system instruction that the LLM will
always have to follow while generating
a response. So let's see.
Poet, right? Let's create a new system
of instruction. Always respond. In a
limb.
Anything random, right?
OK. So instructions are same. Let me
close this.
Essays always respond in a poem.
It says no API key. Right now, I've not
generated an API key and not provided
it. Although if I want to use some of
the modern features of AI studio, it
would require an API key, and there
would be some minor costs involved,
right?
Now, temperature. We saw in one of the
previous videos what temperature is. It
controls the creativity of the response.
Currently, it's set to 1, and it ranges
from 0 to.
2, right? Although I recommend that you
stay between 0 and 1, right? So let's
stay somewhere in the middle 0.65.
Media resolution. So if you generate
some media, which is images and videos,
you can select the resolution, right?
However, this is not useful for us
right now. Thinking level. Thinking
level is high. It just means the
reasoning level. So if we ask very um
puzzle sort of intelligent questions,
how much reasoning level do we want to
assign to the model? It selects that.
Structured outputs, so we saw one
example of Jason output, right? It this
toggle controls that code execution.
Do we want it to also execute the code
that it generates, right?
Let's deselect it for now. Function
calling, these are the tools that you
can attach to. Your LLM.
So for example, if you want to add um
tool that fetches whether in real time,
you can add that function or or tool,
function or tool, same thing, right?
Grounding with Google Search, right? So
do you want the response to be grounded
with Google Search? So we saw
groundedness or faithfulness as a
metric, right? This is the same thing.
What it will do is it will also go and
search Google. And then generate a
response. Grounding with Google Maps.
So the same thing, there is a location
that you want to be verified with
Google Maps, you can select this URL
context. So if you want to browse the
URL while generating the response. All
right. Safety settings under advanced
settings you see safety settings. What
are these? These are essentially the
guard rails that you would want to or
may not want to, depending on your use
case, set on your LLM application. So
your response or the query, you can set
it on both. So do you want harassment
to be turned off or blocked, right? You
can select that. Same for hate and for
other.
Safety settings. Now you can set output
length and stop sequence, right? The
important one is top P. We saw top P
and temperature, right? Ways to control
the output. So top P is currently set
to 0.95, which is a decent enough
setting, right? None. This was on the
playground of Google AI Studio. There
are other features as well which we
briefly discussed earlier. Build, where
you can wipe code applications,
dashboard where you can see the
activity.
Documentation, very important.
So documentation gives you all the
necessary details on how you can use
these models, what are the features of
these models, and how you can also
build your use cases in your scripting
language, say Python or JavaScript, etc.
So if you're using Python, you can just
simply copy this code and execute it in
your notebook or Python file.
I highly recommend that you go through
the documentation.
Right now these are some of the
settings if you want to search
something, if you want to see what's
the latest launches, get API keys very
important. This we will explore in the
next video.
Some settings and your username, right,
with which you have logged in.
All right, learners, so this was a
quick walkthrough of Google AI Studio.
I hope you've enjoyed this. And this is
a cue for you to go out and test it for
yourself, right? So I'll see you in the
next video where we will generate an
API key to start using, to start using
the Gemini elements, right?
Thank you.
