Hello to all of you. My name is Dr. Hemant Rathaur and we are in the machine learning course. Today,
we're going to start with a new module, module 2, data pre-processing. In this module, we are going
to discuss different steps of data pre-processing. This we have already discussed in the last semester in the course data pre-processing. So module 2 is more about the revision of what we have done in the last semester. So in this video of module 2, we are going to discuss different building blocks of data like objects, attributes and types. So the learning objective of this video is we are going to first look into what is data set and data objects. Then we are going to discuss
what are the attributes and what is its role in describing data objects. Then we are going to look into different types of attributes like nominal, ordinal, interval and ratio. So let's start right away. So what is data set? Data set is a collection of data objects. Think about it as a container, a big container holding various piece of information in a structured way. So let's suppose if you have a lot of information,
if you structure it and then store it, if you structure it and then store it, then it is called as data set. Let's take a very simple example of bank. Let's suppose I am a customer and I go to a bank today and then deposit 100 rupees. So that log would be generated by the bank and would be stored. Now tomorrow let's suppose I go again and do some transaction. If I do this sort of transaction thousands of time, right, lot of logs will be generated. To store this information, it is always
better to store it in a structured way. If I have millions of customers, then it is thousands of transactions multiplied by millions of transactions. So huge amount of data. So huge amount of data. And to store that information and retrieve the information properly from this data, we need to store that in a structured way. So if you look into your bank passbook, it is a very good example of data set. If you look into your bank passbook, it would look something like this. Right? First column would be
date. Second column would be transaction ID. Third column would be credit, then debit and then balance. Whenever you are doing any transaction, the date would be noted down. Transaction ID would be noted down. If it has a credit transaction, right, this entry would be filled and the balance will be filled. And this is how we store thousands of transactions done by a customer in
in a structured way. And I can do it across the bank with various customers as well. So if you have huge amount of data, right, and you want to store it in a structured way, then it is called as a data set. Few other examples of data set are sales data set, medical database, university database, all these are a good example of data set or database. Now if you look into a data set, if you look very carefully in a data set,
right, assuming it is in a table form, right, assuming it is in a table form, in a table like format, it will have two things. One is rows and second one is columns. So any table, so you have huge amount of data, assuming I am storing that huge amount of data in a table like format, like a bank passbook. Now if you look into a bank passbook, it has two properties, two things. One is rows and another one is columns.
So when you do any transaction, so when you do any transaction, that is noted down in a particular row. When you do another transaction, that transaction would be noted down in another row. When you do the third transaction, it will be noted down in another row. And so on. So essentially, your rows are containing data points.
These data points are also called as records, points, cases, sample, entity, instances, tuple. All these are essentially representing the rows, are talking about the rows, right. So this is transaction 1, this is row number 1, this is one tuple, one data point.
Now this particular transaction is explained or understood with the help of columns. So in columns, what you have are attributes. So what do you have in the columns here? What is the date? What is the transaction ID? Whether it was credit, debit and the balance?
So date, transaction id, credit, debit and balance all these are attributes. Each transaction is explained or defined with the help of attributes. So let's suppose transaction 1 it was done on let's suppose 1st January 25 the transaction id was 001 it was credit of 100 rupees no deduction and the balance is again 100 rupees.
So this transaction 1 is explained or defined with the help of attributes. So in column you have attributes so if it is a tabular data rows are tuples columns are attributes or features. So as I was saying right in rows you have tuples and in column you have attributes. So what is the role of attribute?
An attribute is a property or characteristics of a data object. What do you know about the data object is called as attribute. A collection of attributes come together to describe a single object.
So attributes are typically represented in columns synonym of attributes are attributes, features etc. Now when we look into attribute right so this is again a tabular data set right and you have rows which are data points and columns which are attributes.
In rows you have four columns. In rows you have four columns. In rows you have four columns refund, marital status, taxable income and cheat. So this is a cheat data set. So transaction 1 is saying refund value is yes. Transaction 1 is defined with the help of all these four attributes and the values are yes, single, 125, k and no. So you have defining a particular object with the help of attributes.
If you look into one particular attribute. If you look into one particular attribute, refund or any attribute will have set of attribute values. So in this case refund has two unique attribute values. Yes and no.
If you look into one particular attribute. If you look into one particular attribute. In other case marital status attribute. The second attribute has three unique attribute values. Single, married, divorced. Taxable income which is a numerical attribute has infinite number of attribute values. Cheat which is a class label again has two unique attribute values. So attribute values are specific number or symbol assigned to an attribute of a particular object.
So in this case marital status has three unique attribute values. Single, married and divorced. Now if you look very carefully. Right. I was talking about taxable income. It is a numerical attribute which can have infinite number of attribute values. There are different types of attributes. So we discussed about data set. One of the way we represent the data set is in a tabular form. Table will have rows.
Table will have rows. Rows are called tuples. Column in a table columns are called attributes. Attributes will have attribute values. Now if you look very carefully into attributes. There are two categories of attributes. One is called qualitative. Also known as categorical attributes. And the other one is called quantitative. Or numerical attributes. So attributes which are measuring quality or characteristic. Right.
Or characteristic. Right. Is called as categorical attribute. And the attribute which is measuring the quantity. Is called numerical attribute. So let's discuss them further. So as I was saying. Right. This one is a categorical attribute. And these are qualitative attribute. And these are quantitative attributes. Okay. So now.
Now these two types of attributes can further be divided into now four types numerical ordinal interval and ratio so nominal and ordinal are qualitative attributes and interval and ratio are quantitative attributes right so let's discuss them revise them quickly once again so what is a numerical attribute a numerical attribute is a symbol or a name that is used to identify or label different objects.
The numerical attribute contain only enough information to distinguish one object from another one value from another so let's suppose heymonth is equal to heymonth so heymonth contain only enough this value contain only enough information to distinguish objects so in this case both these attribute values are same heymonth is not equal to
right so both these attribute values contain only enough information to say whether the two values are same or different right so that is called nominal attribute in nominal attribute we can only perform equality operations which is equal to and non equal to right not equal to so here we saw we can say that heymonth equals to heymonth or heymonth is not equal to rator right so numerical attribute contain only enough
enough information to distinguish one value from another example of nominal attributes are id number i color and zip code id number can be a unique identifier i color blue green down zip code 1001 and so on all these are numerical attribute it contain only enough information for example blue is equal to blue i can write i can also write blue
so these attribute values are not equal to green so these attribute values contain only enough information to either say the two values are same or two values are different that's it now we have ordinal attribute what do you mean by ordinal attribute ordinal attribute have values that can be ranked or ordered so ordinal attributes are those attribute where attribute values can be ranked or ordered in a particular
order ascending descending the distance between attribute values here has no meaning so in ordinal attribute the distance between two attribute values has no meaning for example grade right if it is relative grading the distance between two unique attribute values has no meaning so ordinal attribute contain only enough information to order the different attribute values so the mathematical operation i can perform on
so ordinal attributes are equality and order equality means equal to and non equal to and order means greater than or greater than good examples of ordinal attributes are grade ranking height right so grade if it is relative grading i can arrange different grades in an order a is better than b is better than c is better than d is better than f right or ranks right if it
is relative ranking right one is better rank than two is better rank than three and so on right tall
medium short right tall is always greater than medium is always greater than short so here and
i can also say tall is equal to tall and i can also say tall is not equal to medium so ordinal
attribute contain only enough information such that attribute values can be arranged in an order
then we have interval type of attribute interval type of attributes are those attributes where
attribute values right the difference between attribute values has meaning and can be measured
using fixed unit right so the property of ordinal attribute is that the difference between attribute
values has meaning now the mathematical operations i can perform on ordinal attributes are equality
equal to not equal to ordered less than greater than and addition subtraction plus and minus
so good example of interval attribute are calendar and temperature right calendar date means that date one
date two date three date four date five date is my interval type of attribute and the different attribute
values are one two three four five now here we can say that the mathematical operations i can perform are
equal to and not equal to greater than less than and plus minus right these are the three types of mathematical operations i can perform on interval type of attribute so here i can say date one is equal to date one date one is not equal to date two right so equality operation i can perform on date calendar dates i can always say one so first one will come then two
will come then three will come then four will come then four will come i can arrange these attribute values in ascending or a descending order and i can also say if today is first and if i add one day to it then i'm going to date two right if today's date is two and i add two days to it then the date would be four and so on so interval attribute contain enough information so that the difference between attribute values make sense
and finally we have ratio type of attribute and finally we have ratio type of attribute and finally we have ratio type of attribute will have all the properties of interval attribute along with a true zero point that means if you take the ratio it will make sense so those attribute where the interval and the ratio make sense are called ratio type of attribute so both difference and ratio between attribute values are making sense then it is called ratio type of attribute so the mathematical operations i can
can perform here are equality here are equality ordered addition and subtraction and multiplication these are the mathematical operations i can perform on ratio type of attribute example of ratio type of attribute are length time count so distance between bits goa and delhi is let's suppose 1000 kilometers if i travel this distance 100 times right so what is the total distance i am doing i am doing this
if i have covered distance between goa and delhi is this much right and i have only done this sort of traveling right so how many times i have traveled i have traveled 10 times so ratio also makes sense right so difference makes sense addition makes sense ratio makes sense and equality and ordering also makes sense so ratio type of attribute right will have difference and ratio
between attribute making sense so what are the mathematical operations i can perform on different attribute values i can do distinctness equal to and not equal to ordered less than greater than addition plus minus and multiplication right multiply and divide right so here we can see that in nominal attributes we can only perform distinctness operation in ordinal attributes i can perform distinctness and ordered operation in interval type of attribute i can perform distinctness
order and addition operation and in ratio type of attribute i can perform all four type of mathematical operations now there are two more type of attributes discrete attributes and continuous attributes discrete attribute means where attribute values are finite for a particular attribute attribute attribute the number of attribute values are finite or countable that is called discrete attribute for example zip code is a discrete attribute
binary attribute will have two unique attribute values 0 and 1 so discrete here the value is 2
right the cardinality of the discrete attribute is 2 then we have continuous attribute continuous
attribute means the attribute values can be of infinite number right so for example right
temperature temperature can be 10 degrees 10.1 10.11 10.111 10.111 so i can have infinite number
of values if i can have infinite number of values in a particular attribute then it is called
continuous attribute if the number of unique attribute values for a particular attribute
is fixed or countable or finite then it is called discrete attribute so in summary in this video
we look into the basic definition we revise the basic definition of data set which is a collection
of data objects and entities and attributes we also looked into different types of attributes
like nominal ordinal interval and ratio and we also looked into different types of attribute
properties or mathematical operations which can perform on attributes which is distinctness
order addition and multiplication we will continue in the next video thank you for attending take care bye bye
