ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
60 
 
 
 
 
 Xenon flash tube emits thousands joules of energy in few milli seconds, but only a part 
of that energy is utilized by the chromium ions while the rest energy heats up the 
apparatus. 
 A cooling arrangement is provided to keep the experimental set up at normal 
temperatures. 
Working:  
 The energy level diagram of chromium ions is shown in figure. 
 The chromium ions get excitation into higher energy levels by absorbing of 5600A0 of 
wave length radiation. 
 The excited chromium ions stay in the level H for short interval of time (10-8 Sec). 
 After their life time 
most 
of 
the 
chromium ions are 
de-excited from H 
to G and a few 
chromium ions are 
de-excited from H 
to M. 
 
 The transition between H and M is non-radioactive transition i.e. the chromium ions 
gives their energy to the lattice in the form of heat. 
 In the Meta stable state the life time of chromium ions is 10-3 sec. 
 Due to the continuous working of flash lamp, the chromium ions are excited to higher 
state H and returned to M level. 
 After few milli seconds the level M is more populated than the level G and hence the 
desired population inversion is achieved. 
 The state of population inversion is not a stable one. 
 The process of spontaneous transition is very high. 
 When the excited chromium ion passes spontaneously from H to M it emits one 
photon of wave length 6943A0. 
 The photon reflects back and forth by the silver ends and until it stimulates an excited 
chromium ion in M state and it to emit fresh photon in phase with the earlier photon. 
 The process is repeated again and again until the laser beam intensity is reached to a 
sufficient value. 
 When the photon beam becomes sufficient intense, it emerges through the partially 
silvered end of the rod. 
 The wave length 6943A0 is in the red region of the visible spectrum on returning to 
ground state (G). 
 
 
 
 
 
