ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
Â©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
42 
 
 
Magnetism has its own application in the field of physics. Magnetic properties have 
been the subject of special interest because of the information they yield about the constitution 
of matter. Magnetics have wide range of application in electrical machinery and in magnetic 
tapes in computers. Magnetic materials are classified into three, namely diamagnetic, 
paramagnetic and ferromagnetic materials.   
Magnetic field: The 3D region around a magnet in which it`s magnetic force is felt is called 
magnetic field of that magnet. It is a scalar quantity.  
 
 
 
 
 
Magnetic dipole: It`s a system consisting of two equal and opposite magnetic poles separated 
by a small distance of 2ğ‘™ğ‘š 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Or  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two poles of equal strength separated by a very small distance is called a magnetic 
dipole.  
Pole strength (m):  The ability of a pole of magnet to attract or repel another magnetic pole is 
called it`s pole strength. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Magnetic dipole moment (ğ›):It can define in three ways depending on situation.            
1. In case of bar magnet it is defined as the product of pole strength and distance between 
them.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ğœ‡= 2ğ‘™ğ‘š 
2. In case of current carrying conductor, it is the product of current (i) and cross section 
area (A) of the conductor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ğœ‡= ğ‘–ğ´ 
3. In case of atom, it is the product of current (i) developed by orbital motion of electron   
and the area covered by the orbital.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ğœ‡= ğ‘–ğ´ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is a vector quantity. Its direction is from south pole to the north pole.  
Its SI unit is ampere m2.
â„
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Magnetic flux(âˆ…): The total number of magnetic lines of force passing normal to a surface in 
a magnetic field is called magnetic flux.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Or  
 
 
 
 
 
 The number of magnetic lines of force passing through a point is called magnetic flux. 
  Its SI unit is weberortesla âˆ’m2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Magnetic field induction or magnetic flux density (B):The magnetic flux passing through a 
unit normal area of substance is defined as magnetic flux density and is denoted by B. It is 
commonly known as magnetic induction.   Let âˆ… be the flux passing through a substance of 
