ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
1 
 
 
 
UNIT I                    HARMONIC OSCILLATIONS 
Introduction to harmonic oscillators 
To and pro motion of a particle about the equilibrium position is known as oscillations. 
Any motion which repeats itself after equal intervals of time is called a periodic motion or 
harmonic motion. 
Ex: Spin of earth, the motion of a satellite around a planet, moon around the earth etc. 
There are two types of oscillators 
i) 
Mechanical oscillators 
ii) 
Electrical oscillators 
The oscillations which are due to change in mechanical quantities such as displacement, 
velocity, acceleration are known as mechanical oscillations. These oscillations belong to 
mechanical oscillator. 
Ex: Spin of earth, moon around the earth etc.. 
The oscillations which are due to electrical and magnetic field vectors in visible light, radio 
waves etc are known as electrical oscillations. These oscillations belong to electrical 
oscillators. 
Ex: A tuned circuit and closed metal cavity oscillate electro magnetically. 
Simple harmonic motion 
The oscillatory motion in which the force is directly proportional to the displacement is called 
simple harmonic motion (S.H.M). The particle or body executing S.H.M is called a simple 
oscillator. Since force is proportional to the displacement, the acceleration is not constant but 
varies with time. 
Simple harmonic oscillator: 
When a particle or body moves such that its acceleration is always directed towards a fixed 
point and varies directly as its distance from that point, the particle or body is said to execute 
S.H.M.The particle or body executing simple harmonic motion is called a simple oscillator. 
Equation of motion of a simple oscillator: 
Equation of motion of a simple oscillator 
Consider a particle p of mass ‘m’ executing S.H.M about equilibrium position ‘o’ along X-
axis. Let x  be the displacement of p from o at any instant, then the restoring force F acting 
upon p is given by  
F α – x  
F = −kx    -------------- (1) 
Where ‘k’ is proportionality factor which represents the force per unit displacement, –ve sign 
indicates force F is opposite to the displacement. 
According to Newton second law of motion 
F= mass × acceleration  
𝐹= 𝑚
𝑑2𝑥
𝑑𝑡2  -------------- (2) 
From equation (1) and (2) 
