PREFACE 
Physics is a fundamental aspect of science on which all engineering sciences are made. The 
fundamental concepts of physics have given the way for the development of engineering 
branch and technologies. All modern technological advances from laser micro surgery to 
television, from computers to mobile phones, from remote controlled toys to space vehicles, 
directly work on the principles of physics. Accordingly, the syllabus of engineering courses 
includes physics as an essential subject. The physics syllabus in engineering course is 
primarily divided into two parts i.e. applied physics & Engineering physics as per curriculum 
requirement in universities & engineering colleges in India. Engineering physics is also 
known as Technical physics related to both science & technology. Engineering physics is 
more focussed on research/development/improvement of the industry & technology. The 
scope of engineering physics is extended to various fields of Engineering & Technology. An 
engineer needs to think in a creative manner to solve the real times problems of world by 
using the weapon of technology. Thus a study of engineering physics gives the students an 
opportunity to develop their skills & creativity. The present hand-book/material of 
engineering physics is divided into five units i.e. Unit-1 deals with Harmonic oscillations, 
Unit-2 deals with wave optics, Unit-3 deals with Introduction to solids, Unit-4 deals with 
Dielectric and Magnetic properties of materials, Unit-5 deals with lasers and fiber-optics. 
Unit-1 deals with Simple harmonic oscillation & simple harmonic oscillator, equation of 
motion and its solution, damped harmonic oscillator, equation of motion and its solution, 
types of damping effects i.e. over, critical and under damped motion, energy decay in damped 
oscillator, Quality factor, forced harmonic oscillator, equation of  motion and its solution. 
Students able to know the working principles of various oscillating mechanical & electrical 
systems subjected to damping forces in real time experience in practical’s or experiments in 
lab. Students know the importance of oscillations and waves which are prime types of motion 
& responsible for communication i.e. seeing, speaking & hearing with the outside world. 
Harmonic oscillations can arise from isolated or coupled oscillator in the system. 
 Unit-2 covers Wave-Optics deals with Interference, superposition of waves, interference of 
light by division of wave front-interference of reflected light in thin films, interference of 
amplitude-Newton’s rings, Diffraction-Diffraction- difference between Fresnel and 
Fraunhofer diffraction, Fraunhofer diffraction due to single slit, Diffraction grating- Grating 
spectrum and resolving power. Students will be familiar with interference and diffraction 
concepts by performing expts in optics lab such as Newton’s rings, dispersive power of 
prism, diffraction grating expt with the help of optical devices (Microscopes & Telescopes) & 
different light sources and know the significance of wave optics in science & engineering 
technology.   
Unit-3 covers Introduction to solids which deals with free electronic theory (Classical & 
Quantum), Fermi level, and density of energy states, periodic potential, Bloch’s theorem, 
Kronig-Penny model, E-K diagram & effective mass of an electron, Origin of energy bands 
& classification of materials into metals, insulators & semiconductors. Students will be to 
think and judge the electric response of materials/solids largely stems from the dynamics of 
electrons, and their interplay with atoms and molecules. Students will be familiar with Fermi 
level and classification of materials based on band –gap of solids. 
 
