ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
65 
 
 
 
 Since the excited level of nitrogen is very close to the E5 level of CO2 atom, population in 
E5 level increases.  
 As soon as population inversion is reached, any of the spontaneously emitted photon will 
trigger laser action in the tube. There are two types of laser transition possible.  
 1.Transition E5  to E4 : This will produces far IR radiation of laser beam at the  wavelength 
10.6μm 
 2.Transition E5  to E3:This laser transition will produce a laser beam of wavelength 9.6μm in IR 
region. Normally 10.6μm transition is more intense than 9.6μm transition. The power output from 
this laser is 10kW. 
E3 and E4 levels also metastable states and the co2 molecules at these levels fall to the lower 
level E2 through inelastic collisions with unexited co2 molecules, then again tends to closer 
ground state through thermal excitations.The nature of output may be continuous wave or 
pulsed wave. 
Advantages:  
1. The construction of CO2 laser is simple and the output of this laser is continuous. 
2. It has high efficiency 
3. It has very high output power. 
4. The output power can be increased by extending the length of the gas tube. 
Disadvantages: 
1. The contamination of oxygen by carbon monoxide will have some effect on laser action 
2. The operating temperature plays an important role in determining the output power of 
laser. 
3. The corrosion may occur at the reflecting plates. 
4. Accidental exposure may damage our eyes, since it is invisible (infrared region) to our 
eyes. 
Applications:  
1. High power CO2 laser finds applications in material processing, welding, drilling, 
cutting soldering etc. 
2. The low atmospheric attenuation (10.6μm makes CO2 laser suitable for open air 
communication. 
3. It is used for remote sensing.  
4. It is used for treatment of liver and lung diseases.  
5. It is mostly used in neuro surgery and general surgery.  
6. It is used to perform microsurgery and bloodless operations. 
 
 
