ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
49 
 
 
 
Motion of Domain walls:When a small amount of magnetic fieldis applied on a ferro 
magnetic material then the domains of the material whose magnetic moments are parallel or 
nearly parallel to the direction of applied field can grow in size where as the domains are not 
parallel to field can diminish in size. This change produces large magnetization for the bulk 
material. 
Rotation of Domains: 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
             When 
the 
magnetic 
field 
is 
increased 
further 
to 
a 
large 
value(i. e. , near saturation), further domains growth becomes impossible and hence fully 
grown domains can rotate into the field direction and specimen is said to be saturated. 
 
HYSTERESIS CURVE:  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
It means retardation. [or] Lagging of an effect behind 
the cause of the effect [or]   The phenomenon of B lagging H. 
[or] It is also defined as a phenomenon of flux density (B) with 
the change in magnetic field strength (H) in a ferromagnetic 
material.     
  
 
Explanation: When the magnetic field  H is applied on an un 
magnetized ferromagnetic material the magnetic induction 
increases first rapidly and then slowly from   o to a. The 
increase is non linear, after that the rate of induction slows 
down and attaining a saturation value Bsat, with further increase in H , there is no increase in 
B.If applied magnetic field H on the material is decreased at this stage, naturally B decreases 
and B will not travel in that initial path, creates a new path.  
 
 When H is reduced to zero, B does not vanish , the value of B that remains in the material is 
called as retentivity Br or reduce magnetisation. To remove retentivity in the material sufficient 
negative magnetic field –Hc or Hc is applied in opposite direction then the retentivity Br 
becomes zero .This is (field) known as coherceive field. On increasing H further B reaches 
saturation in the opposite direction denoted by ’c’. Then reducing H to zero B reaches ‘d’ and 
then increasing H in the positive direction B reaches again to Bsat and a curve is obtained. This 
completes a closed loop called hysteresis loop.   It includes some area. This area indicates the 
amount of energy wasted in one cycle of operation.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
