ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
58 
 
 
 
Optical pumping: 
Optical pumping is used in solid laser. Xenon flash tubes are used for optical pumping. 
Since these materials have very broad band absorption, sufficient amount of energy is absorbed 
from the emission band of flash lamp and population inversion is created. Examples of 
optically pumped lasers are ruby, Nd: YAG Laser ( Y3 AL5G12 ) 
(Neodymium: Yttrium Aluminum Garnet), Nd: Glass Laser 
Electrical discharge pumping: 
Electrical discharge pumping is used in gas lasers. Since gas lasers have very narrow 
absorption band pumping them any flash lamp is not possible. Examples of Electrical 
discharge pumped lasers are He-Ne laser, CO2 laser, argon-ion laser, etc 
Chemical pumping: 
Chemical reaction may also result in excitation and hence creation of population 
inversion in few systems. Examples of such systems are HF and DF lasers. 
Injection current pumping: 
In semiconductors, injection of current through the junction results in creates of 
population inversion among the minority charge carriers. Examples of such systems are InP 
and GaAs. 
PRINCIPLE OF LASER/LASING ACTION:  
Let us consider many no of atoms in the excited state. Now the stimulating photon 
interacts with any one of the atoms in the excited state, the stimulated emission will occur. It 
emits two photons, having same energy & 
same frequency move in the same direction. 
These two photons will interact with another 
two atoms in excited state & emit 8-
photons. In a similar way chain reaction is 
produced 
this 
phenomenon 
is 
called 
“Principle of lasing –action”. We get a 
monochromatic, coherent, directional & 
intense beam is obtained. This is called laser beam. This is the principle of working of a laser. 
 
Components of a LASER: 
Any laser system consists of 3-important components. They 
are    
(i) Source of energy or pumping source 
(ii) Active-medium (Laser Material) 
(iii)Optical cavity or resonator 
(i) Energy Source :  It supply energies & pumps the atoms or 
molecules in the active medium to excited states. As a result 
we get population inversion in the active medium which emits 
laser. 
 
