ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
23 
 
 
 
Unit III                     INTRODUCTION TO SOLIDS 
 
Free electron theory: 
In solids, electrons in outer most orbits of atoms determine its electrical properties. Electron 
theory is applicable to all solids, both metals and non metals. In addition, it explains the 
electrical, thermal and magnetic properties of solids. The structure and properties of solids are 
explained employing their electronic structure by the electron theory of solids. 
 It has been developed in three main stages: 
1. Classical free electron theory 
2. Quantum Free Electron Theory. 
3. Zone Theory. 
 Classical free electron theory: The first theory was developed by Drude & Lorentz in 
1900. According to this theory, metalcontains free electrons which are responsible for the 
electrical conductivity and metals obey the laws of classical mechanics. 
 Quantum Free Electron Theory: In 1928Sommerfield developed the quantum free 
electron theory. According toSommerfield, the   free electrons move with a constant 
potential. This theory obeys quantum laws.  
 Zone Theory: Bloch introduced the band theory in 1928. According to this theory, free 
electrons move in a periodic potential provided by the lattice. This theory is also called 
“Band Theory of Solids”. It gives complete informational study of electrons.  
 
Classical free electron theory:  
Even though the classical free electron theory is the first theory developed to explain the 
electrical conduction of metals, it has many practical applications. The advantages and 
disadvantages of the classical free electron theory are as follows: 
Advantages: 
1. It explains the electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity of metals. 
2. It verifies ohm’s law. 
3. It is used to explain the optical properties of metals. 
4. The valence electrons are freely moving about the whole volume of the metals like the 
molecules of perfect gas in a container 
5. The free electrons moves in random directions and collide with either positive ions or 
other free electrons. Collision is independent of charges and is elastic in nature 
6. The movements of free electrons obey the laws of classical kinetic theory of gases 
7. Potential field remains constant throughout the lattice. 
Drawbacks: 
1. The classical free electron model predicts the incorrect temperature dependence of 
𝜎.According to the classical free electron theory ,𝜎 𝛼 𝑇−1 . 
2. It fails to explain superconducting properties of metals. 
3. It fails to explain new phenomena like photoelectric effect, Compton effect, black –
body radiation, etc. 
