ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
35 
 
 
 
Introduction: 
All dielectric materials are insulators but all insulators are not perfect dielectric 
materials. There are no free charges available for conduction in a dielectric. All the electrons 
are tightly bound to their nucleus of the atoms. When the dielectric is placed in an electric 
field, then separation of positive and negative charges takes place in a dielectric, causing 
polarization of dielectric. Dielectrics are characterized by polarization & dielectric constant. 
Dielectrics materials store large amounts of electro-static fields. 
 
There are two principal methods by which a dielectric can be polarized: stretching and 
rotation.Stretching an atom or molecule results in an induced dipole moment added to every 
atom or molecule.Rotation occurs only in polar molecules — those with a permanent dipole 
moment like the water molecule shown in the diagram below. 
 
Basic Definitions: 
(1)Electric Dipole: Two opposite charges of equal magnitude 
separated by a finite distance constitutes an electric dipole. 
 
(ii) Dipole moment(µ): Electric dipole moment is defined  as 
the  product of one of the charges and the charge separating 
distance. 
Units: coulomb meter or Debye,   1 Debye =3.3 × 10-30 c-m 
 
(iii) Permittivity (ε):  Permittivity represents the easily polar sable nature of the dielectric or 
medium.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
εo=permittivity of free space=8.854×10-12  F/m 
 
 
(iv)Dielectric constant(εr): Dielectric constant is the 
ratio between the permittivity of the medium and the 
permittivity of free space. 
 
 
 
 
Let us take a parallel plate capacitor. Suppose 
the separation distance between the plates is d. Use 
air or vacuum as a medium for this experiment. 
 
 
 
Suppose +Q is the charge on 
one plate and –Q is charge on the second plate. Bring 
a rectangular slab made up of conducting material 
between the plates of the capacitor. The thickness of 
the slab must be less than the distance between the plates of the capacitor. When the electric 
field will be applied then polarization of molecules will be started. The polarization will take 
place in the direction same as that of electric field. Consider a vector that must be polarized, 
name it as P. The polarization vector must be in the direction of electric field Eo. Then this 
vector will start its functioning and will produce an electric field Ep in the opposite direction to 
that of Eo. The net electric field in the circuit is shown by the figure.  
εr = ε/εo 
 
 
    E= Eo – Ep 
