ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
52 
 
 
 
Suppose when two photons each of amplitude ‘A’ are in phase with other, then young’s 
principle of superposition, the resultant amplitude of two photons is 2A and the intensity is 4a2. 
Since in laser many numbers of photons are in phase with each other, the amplitude of the 
resulting wave becomes ‘nA’ and hence the intensity of laser is proportional to n2A2. So 1mw 
He-Ne laser is highly intense than the sun. 
 
4.  Highly coherence 
A predictable correlation of the amplitude and phase at any one point with other point is 
called coherence.In case of conventional light, the property of coherence exhibits between a 
source and its virtual source where as in case of laser the property coherence exists between 
any two sources of same phase. 
There are two types of coherence 
i) Temporal coherence  
ii) Spatial coherence.  
Temporal coherence (or longitudinal coherence): 
The predictable correlation of amplitude and phase at one point on the wave train w .r. t 
another point on the same wave train, then the wave is said to be temporal coherence. 
 
 
 
Spatial coherence (or transverse coherence): 
The predictable correlation of amplitude and phase at one point on the wave train w. r .t 
another point on a second wave, then the waves are said to be spatial coherence (or transverse 
coherence).Two waves are said to be coherent when the waves must have same phase & 
amplitude. 
 
 
 
INTERACTION OF LIGHT WITH MATTER AND THE THREE 
QUANTUM PROCESSES: 
 
When the radiation interacts with matter, results in the following three important 
phenomena. They are 
 (i)Induced or Stimulated Absorption 
(ii)Spontaneous Emission 
(iii)Stimulated Emission 
STIMULATED ABSORPTION (OR) INDUCED ABSORPTION (OR) ABSORPTION:    
An atom in the lower energy level or ground state energy level (E1) absorbs the incident photon 
and goes to excited state (E2) as shown in figure below. This process is called induced or 
stimulated absorption. 
 
 
