ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
14 
 
 
 
2
cos
t
r
n



where n=0, 1, 2………. 
   Depending on the conditions the interference pattern consists of bright and dark fringes. 
Newton’s Rings: 
Newton’s rings are one of the best examples for the interference in a non uniform thin 
film. When a plano convex lens with its convex surface is placed on a plane glass plate, an air 
film of increasing thickness is formed between the two. The thickness of the film at the point 
of contact is zero. 
If monochromatic light is allowed to fall normally and the film is viewed in the 
reflected light, alternate dark and bright rings concentric around 
the point of contact between the lens and glass plate are seen. 
These circular rings were discovered by Newton and are called 
as Newton’s rings.   
The plano-convex lens (L) of large radius of curvature is 
placed with its convex surface on a plane glass plate (P). The 
lens makes the contact with the plate at ‘O’. The 
monochromatic light falls on a glass plate G held at an angle of 
450 with the vertical. The glass plate G reflects normally a part 
of the incident light towards the air film enclosed by the lens L 
and the glass plate P. A part of the light is reflected by the 
curved surface of the lens L and a part is transmitted which is reflected back from the plane 
surface of the plate. These reflected rays interfere and give rise to an interference pattern in the 
form of circular rings. These rings are seen near the upper surface of the air film through the 
microscope. 
Explanation: 
Newton’s rings are formed due to interference 
between the light rays reflected from the top and 
bottom surfaces of air film between the plate and the 
lens. A part of the incident light is reflected at a point 
in the form of the ray (1) with any additional phase 
change. The other part is refracted and again reflected 
in the form of the ray (2) with additional phase change of π or path change of λ/2. 
 
As the rings are observed in the reflected light, the path difference between the rays is  
2
cos
2
pathdiffernce
t
r




 
    For air film μ = 1 and for normal incidence r = 0, 
 
 
