ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
76 
 
 
 
Information signal source:  
 The information signal to be transmitted may be voice, video or computer data (analog 
signals). 
 In order to communicate through optical fiber, the analog signals are converted into 
electrical signals.( by Analog to Digital converter) 
 The converted electrical signals are passed through the transmitter. 
Transmitter: 
 The transmitter is a modulator device used to receive electrical input signal, and then 
modulate it into digital pulses for propagation into an optical fiber. 
 The modulator consists of a driver and a light source as shown in fig. 
 The driver receives the electrical signals and then converts into the digital pulses. 
 These digital pulses are converted into optical signals after passing through a light 
source, generally either light emitting diodes (LED’s) or a semi conductor laser is used 
as light source. 
 The optical signals are then focused into the optical fiber as shown in fig. 
Optical Fiber (or) Transmission medium: 
 The optical fiber is used as transmission medium between the transmitter and the 
receiver. 
 The optical signals are then fed into an optical fiber cable where they are transmitted 
over long distances using the principle of total internal reflection. 
Receiver: 
 The receiver is a demodulator device used to receive the optical signals from the optical 
fiber and then convert into electrical signals. 
 The demodulator consists of a photodetector, an amplifier and a signal restorer. 
 The optical signals which are emerging from the optical fiber are received by photo 
detector. 
 The photodetector converts the optical signals into electrical signals. 
 The electrical signals are then amplified by the amplifier and the amplified electrical 
signals are converted into digital form. 
 The amplified electrical signals are fed to a signal restorer where the original voice is 
recovered. 
Advantages of Optical Fibers in communication system: 
 High data transmission rates and bandwidth. 
 Low losses. 
 Small cable size and weight. 
 Immunity to EM radiations. 
 Safety due to lack of sparks. 
 Data security. 
 
 
 
 
