ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
10 
 
 
 
 
UNIT II                             WAVE OPTICS 
Introduction:  
Optics is a branch of physics which deals with the “Theory of light and its propagation 
in a given medium”. The branch of optics is divided into two parts  
1. Ray or Geometrical optics and  
2. Physical or Wave optics 
Ray optics: Ray optics deals with image formation by optical systems. It was supported by 
Newton’s corpuscular theory. It deals with the particles propagating in a medium called “light-
photons with energy En = nhυ in a medium” 
Physical optics:Physical optics deals with nature of light. Huygens proposed the wave 
theory of light. According to this, a luminous body is a source of disturbance in a hypothetical 
medium called “ether” 
Superposition Principle:  According to superposition principle “The resultant or total 
displacement of the medium acted upon by two or more waves simultaneously equal to sum or 
difference of displacements of individual waves”. 
1
2
 
 
 
n
R or Y
y
y
y



 
Interference of light:   
It is defined as “Modification of Resultant Intensity of 
light obtained by the superposition of two or more light waves”. 
This theory of interference of light was developed by Thomas 
young in his experimental study of light. The resultant intensity 
consists of series of bright & dark fringes that appear on the 
screen which are known as interference pattern or interference 
fringes which correspond to maximum & minimum intensities of light.  
 
Interference pattern may be either straight or circular or parabolic (Arc) fringes 
Coherent Sources:If the phase difference between two light waves emitted from two 
sources is zero or has a constant value then the sources are said to be coherent. 
Incoherent- sources:If the phase difference between two light waves coming from two 
sources changes with time, the sources are called as “In-coherent Sources”. 
Types of interference:Interference of light based upon young’s double slit experiment is 
divided into two types. 
