ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
Â©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
68 
 
 
 
FIBER-OPTICS 
 
INTRODUCTION TO OPTICAL FIBER:  
Fiber optics is a branch of physics which deals with the transmission & reception of light 
waves using optical fibers which acts as a guiding media. The transmission of light waves by 
fiber optics was first demonstrated by John Tyndall in 1870. 
Optical Fiber:  
Optical fiber is a thin & transparent guiding medium or material which guides the information 
carrying light waves. It is a cylindrical wave-guide system which propagates the data & speech 
signals in the optical frequency range. 
A light beam acting as a carrier wave is capable of carrying more information than radio waves 
& microwaves because of its high frequency as shown below. 
Radio waves - 104 Hz  ,   Micro waves - 1010 Hz,   Light waves - 1015 Hz 
Construction: 
An optical fiber is a very thin, flexible transparent 
made with plastic or glass. 
It has cylindrical shape consisting of three layers or 
sections 
1 )  The  Core                               
2 )   The Cladding 
3 )   The Outer jacket  or  Buffer jacket 
1)The Core:It is the central layer surrounded by another layer called cladding. Light is 
transmitted within the core which has refractive index (n1). It is a denser medium. Core is made 
of silica (SiO2). 
2)The Cladding:It is the second layer, surrounded by a third layer called the outer jacket. It 
has refractive index n2 which is less than the refractive index of core i.e (n1 >n2 ). It acts as a 
rarer medium. It keeps the light within the core because n1>n2. To lower the refractive index of 
cladding the silica is doped with phosphorous or bismuth material. 
3)The Outer or Buffer Jacket:It is the third layer it protects the fiber from moisture & 
abrasion. To provide necessary toughness & tensile strength, a layer of strength member is 
arranged surrounding buffer jacket. It is made of polyurethane material. 
Working Principle of Optical Fiber:  
Total Internal Reflection: The principle of optical fiber is total internal reflection.  
Condition for Total Internal Reflection: 
1)  The light ray should move from denser to rarer medium. 
2)  The refractive index of core must be greater than cladding i.e. n1>n2 
3)  The angle of incidence (i) must be greater than the critical angle(Î¸c) i.e. i>Î¸c. 
4)  The critical angleğœƒğ‘= ğ‘ ğ‘–ğ‘›âˆ’1 ğ‘›2
ğ‘›1. 
 
 
