MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING & TECHNOLOGY 
B. TECH- I- YEAR- I-SEM                      
 
(R20A0012) ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
COURSE OBJECTIVES:  
1. To gain the knowledge on the basic concepts of oscillations exhibited by various systems in 
nature.  
2. To Study the basic concepts of light through interference and diffraction. 
3. To explore band structure of the solids and classification of materials.             
4. To Compare dielectric and magnetic properties of the materials and enable them to design 
and apply in different fields. 
5. To analyze the ordinary light with a laser light and realize the transfer of light through 
optical fibers. 
UNIT – I 
HARMONIC OSCILLATIONS                                                                                                   (10Hours) 
Introduction to harmonic oscillators, simple harmonic oscillator: equation of motion and its 
solution (complex exponential method), damped harmonic oscillator: equation of motion and 
its solution, over, critical and lightly-damped oscillators; energy decay in damped harmonic 
oscillator, Quality factor (qualitative), forced damped harmonic oscillator: equation of motion 
and its solution. 
UNIT – II 
WAVEOPTICS                                                                                                                          (10Hours)
 Interference- Introduction, Superposition of waves, interference of light by division of wave 
front-interference of reflected light in thin films, interference of light by division of amplitude- 
Newton’s rings, Diffraction- difference between Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction, Fraunhofer 
diffraction due to single slit, Diffraction grating- Grating spectrum and resolving power. 
UNIT- III 
INTRODUCTION TO SOLIDS   
 
 
                                                        (7 Hours) 
Free electron theory (Classical & Quantum): Assumptions, Merits and drawbacks, Fermi level, 
Density of states, Periodic potential, Bloch’s theorem, Kronig – Penny modal , E – K diagram, 
Effective mass, Origin of energy bands in solids, Classification of materials : Metals, semi 
conductors and insulators. 
 
 
L 
T 
P 
C 
3 
- 
- 
3 
