ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
59 
 
 
 
 
Ex: Xenon flash lamp, electric field. 
(ii) Active medium: The medium in which the population inversion takes place is called as 
active medium. 
Active-centre: The material in which the atoms are raised to excited state to achieve 
population inversion is called as active center. 
(iii) Optical-cavity or resonator: The active medium is enclosed between a fully reflected 
mirror & a partially reflective mirror. This arrangement is called as cavity or resonator. As a 
result, we get highly intense monochromatic, coherence laser light through the non-reflecting 
portion of the mirror. 
DIFFERENT TYPES OF LASERS 
On the basis of active medium used in the laser systems, lasers are classified into several types 
I. 
Solid lasers 
: Ruby laser, Nd;YAG laser, Nd;Glass 
II. Liquid lasers 
: Europium Chelate laser, SeOCl2 
III. Gas lasers 
: CO2, He-Ne, Argon-Ion Laser 
IV. Dye lasers 
: Rhodamine 6G 
V. Semiconductor lasers     : InP, GaAs.  
 
RUBY LASER  
Ruby laser is a three level solid state laser and was developed by Mainmann in 1960. 
Ruby (Al2O3+Cr2O3) is a crystal of Aluminium oxide, in which 0.05% of Al+3 ions are replaced 
by the Cr+3 ions. The colour of the ruby rod is pink. The active medium in the ruby rod is Cr+3 
ions. 
Principle or Characteristics of a ruby laser: 
Due to optical pumping, the chromium atoms are raised to excited states then the atoms come 
to metastable state by non-radiative transition. Due to stimulated emission the transition of 
atoms takes place from metastable state to ground state and gives a laser beam. 
Construction: 
 In ruby laser 4cm length and 5mm diameter rod is generally used. 
 Both the ends of the rods are highly polished and made strictly parallel. 
 The ends are silvered in such a way, one becomes partially reflected and the other end 
fully reflected. 
 The 
ruby 
rod 
is 
surrounded by xenon 
flash 
tube, 
which 
provides the pumping 
light 
to 
excite 
the 
chromium ions in to 
upper energy levels. 
 
 
 
 
