 
UNIT – IV 
DIELECTRICS AND MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS  
                           (10 Hours) 
Dielectrics: Introduction, Types of polarizations (Electronic and Ionic) and calculation of their 
polarizabilities, internal fields in a solid, Clausius-Mossotti relation. 
Magnetism: Introduction, Bohr magneton, classification of dia, para and ferro magnetic 
materials on the basis of magnetic moment, Properties of anti-ferro and ferri magnetic 
materials, Hysteresis curve based on Domain theory of ferro magnetism, Soft  and hard 
magnetic materials. 
UNIT-V 
LASERS                                                                                                                                     (10 Hours)                                  
Characteristics of lasers, Absorption, Spontaneous and Stimulated emissions, Einstein’s 
Coefficients, population inversion, meta stable state, types of pumping, lasing action, 
construction and working of Ruby Laser, Helium-Neon Laser,CO2 Laser, Applications of lasers. 
Fiber Optics: Introduction to optical fiber, Construction and working principle of an Optical 
Fiber, Acceptance angle and Numerical aperture, Types of Optical fibers - Mode and 
Propagation through step and graded index fibers , Attenuation in optical fiber, Optical Fiber in  
Communication System, Applications of optical fibers 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. Engineering Physics by Arumugam, Anuradha publications.   
2. Engineering Physics- B.K. Pandey, S. Chaturvedi, Cengage Learning. 
REFERENCES: 
1. Engineering Physics – R.K. Gaur and S.L. Gupta, DhanpatRai Publishers. 
2. Engineering Physics, S Mani Naidu- Pearson Publishers. 
3. Engineering physics 2nd edition –H.K. Malik and A.K. Singh. 
4. Engineering Physics – P.K. Palaniswamy, Scitech publications. 
5. Physics by Resnick and Haliday. 
 
COURSE OUTCOMES: After completion of studying Engineering Physics the student is able to, 
1. Analyze the various oscillations made by different oscillating bodies in nature. 
2. Design different devices to go to maximum accuracy in measuring the dimensions optically. 
3. Find the importance of band structure of solids and their applications in various electronic 
devices. 
4. Examine dielectric, magnetic properties of the materials and apply them in material 
technology. 
5. Observe the properties of light and its engineering applications of laser in fiber optic 
communication systems. 
 
