Welcome back learners to the 5th lab
for this course
where we will implement topic modelling
with LDA. Welcome to the 5th lab
session, learners. In this lab session,
we will be implementing topic modelling.
For the 1st implementation, we will use
the LDA model, and in the 2nd
implementation we will use a
transformer-based model for topic
modelling, right? So let's get started.
So let's first install the GEEM and
NLTK library in our environment and
also run these.
All right, so our environment is set up.
What I've done is I've installed the
dictionary. Method from GI, the LDA
model method from GEIM. I've imported
NLTK, the stop words from NLTK, and the
tokenizer from NLTK, right? And these
are some of the dictionaries and list
of words that we will need for our
implementation. These are also coming
from NLTK. Perfect. Now we are ready to
begin.
Let's prepare a data set. These are
just some random sentences that I've
added in one list, right? We are naming
it documents. Now what I want you to do
is go through the documents, which are
these sentences and identify the main
themes right before we proceed. For
example, you take this sentence Stock
markets reacted to inflation news. So
what will be the main theme about stock
market? And inflation, right? Something
like this. Whatever the top 2, top 3
topics or themes that you can find,
just write it down here and then
revisit this once you're done with the
lab.
All right, so let's run this, our
documents is set. Now let's do some
preprocessing on these documents. So
what I'll do is I'll download all the
stop words. I will remove the stop
words, and I will tokenize it, right?
So let's look at the process docs. So I
will. Copy this here and I will run
this, right? So sentences have been
tokenized and the stop words have been
removed, all right, and we have also
converted everything to lowercase,
right? So normalisation has been
implemented.
Now let's implement some word embedding
with bag of words. So let's run these
two cells, right. So what we've done is
we've from Jensen we've downloaded a
dictionary, right? So what we're doing
is we are mapping words to the IDs in
this dictionary, right? And then we are
creating this bag of words, so our
tokens, which are these.
Have been converted into. This word
embedding. Right? I hope this makes
sense.
Now let's go and train our LDA model.
So LDA model coming from Jensen, I've
initialised it here. I'm passing the
corpus, which is this, right?
I'm passing the dictionary, which is
this.
And then we pass a number of topics
that we want to identify. This is to be
done manually, to be set manually. So
this LDA model will be trained to
predict 3 topics from the corpus, right?
Now let's run this. So what we've done
is LDA model.get document topics and we
pass doc. For this doc, it is just
every list from this list of lists,
which is the corpus, right?
So now you see, so document zero, which
was the first sentence, has been
assigned these topics. These are the
confidence scores. So topic zero has
been assigned a score of 0.07. Topic
one has been assigned a score of 0.86,
and topic two has been assigned a score
of 0.06. So, so how do you want to
interpret this? Is that topic zero, the
model's confidence is 7%, right? Topic
one, the model's confidence is 86%. And
topic two, the model's confidence is 6%,
right? So essentially the output is
that this sentence. This sentence,
which is essentially this sentence,
right, has been assigned the topic 1
out of 01 and 2, right?
Similarly, 90% for topic zero.
4% and 4%, so we will assign topic zero
to the. Document one, right, so on and
so forth. Now In LDA you have to define
or add a definition to each topic, 01,
and 2, the label to these topics,
manually. However, there is a Python
way of doing that to make your job easy.
Let's do that.
So what I've done is LDA model, which
was this trained model.
Dot print topics, right?
So the topic 0 has words like learning,
data sets require all of these, so I've
printed the top 5 words.
Right, so each topic is a distribution
over different words. So first topic
has words like learning, datasets, etc.
etc.
This tells us that, OK, maybe topic 0
is about something about data or
machine learning, right? Topic 1 is
about maybe markets and inflation and
stocks, right? Topic 2 maybe is about
football and teams preparing cups, so
maybe football World Cup, maybe that is
the theme, right? So this is how you
will have to add the labels to each
topic within LD. OK, now let's do it in
a little different way, a much more
prettier way. So right, so what I'm
doing is last time I ran LDAmodel.
print topics, here I'm just using a
different method to show you a
different way of doing the same, right?
So LDAmodel.show topics, and we want to
print 10 words.
So topic zero has words like learning,
datasets require, model, deep, large,
healthcare, etc. etc. Topic one has
markets reacted, inflation, news, talk,
right? Topic two has words like
football team, World Cup, etc. etc.
Right, so here also you can find these
words and maybe add a nice label to
each topic. Cool. So this is
essentially the end of this video. You
have implemented topic modelling with
LDA model, right? I will leave you with
one exercise.
Answer these four questions on your own,
right? Do topics look clean? Are there
some words that are repeated across
different topics, etc. etc. right?
Answering these questions will, will
further deepen your foundational
understanding about topic modelling,
right? After this, what will be your
task? You know it already.
Come here, change this dataset with
anything of your choice, and run topic
modelling again. And implemented again.
All right. Thank you. All right, that's
it for this lesson and I'll see you in
the next one. Thank you.
