


  Page 1 of 3




      10 Build & Trigger Lambda Transcript
Module 10, lesson 4, Practical Lab. So far, we manually invoked the Lambda functions.
But in real life, Lambda is rarely triggered by humans.
Instead, Lambda reacts to events. This is called event-driven architecture. An event is
something that happens, which could be as simple as uploading a file, inserting a data,
or even clicking a button.
So common examples are any CSV file uploaded by some team member or a new
data arriving every hour, logs generated by an application. So instead of asking when
to run the code, we let the system decide when something happens. So the flow of
this practical lab is all about demonstrating how an event will be triggered, and the
Lambda will start running the logic based on that trigger and generate some logs for
us to monitor what has happened regarding that event.
And that's exactly what we are going to build now. Imagine a data science team where
raw datasets are uploaded to cloud storage. Before analysis or machine learning, we
want to automatically validate the data.
Every time a file is uploaded, Lambda runs automatically. It checks basic properties of
the dataset and logs the result. For this, let's try to create a S3 bucket before we start
with our Lambda.
So we are going to use S3 as an event. So we'll just create a simple bucket. We'll call
it as dseventupload.
We'll use the default settings and just go ahead and create a bucket. Now, this bucket
represents the raw data ingestion. Let's create our Lambda as well.
We'll follow the same process, the one which we followed earlier. So I'll say
dseventvalidator, some meaningful name. We'll use Python.
You can use the existing one. Let's create a new role and we'll just modify the
permissions. All right, so let's quickly verify what all permissions our role has.
So the flow we are trying to execute here is whenever some event like uploading a file
or deleting a file or any event happening inside this bucket our Lambda should
automatically detect the change happening in this bucket and trigger a logic. But
before that, we need to make sure that our Lambda has permissions regarding S3. So
we'll quickly add S3 permissions in this case.




  Page 2 of 3


You can add read -only permissions. All right, so now our role has all the necessary
permissions to create the logs and also observe what is going on in our S3 bucket.
Now, Lambda will just assume this role and perform the actions accordingly.
I've written a simple programming logic for this data set processing. So I'll just quickly
replace this default one and paste the logic which I've created. I'll deploy the change
so that this logic is considered.
Now, this is just a data validation logic. Not analytics yet. All right, so the validation
always comes first in the data pipelines.
If my changes are deployed before adding a trigger, I'll just observe if my changes are
running correctly or not. I'll create an event ds -demo. OK, so my Lambda has ran
successfully.
This error that you're seeing over here is because it is expecting a certain name of the
bucket. But if we are trying to add some logic in the bucket related to an S3, we do not
have any S3 attached to this Lambda. So that is the error which is expected.
Let's try to add the trigger. Since we are trying to build a trigger for our S3 bucket, like
any event happens on this bucket, our Lambda should trigger. We'll just choose S3.
Within the S3, the name of our bucket is ds-event-upload. So let's look for our bucket.
This is the bucket which we create.
And coming to the event types, what all events should happen that your Lambda will
detect them and trigger. So I'll say all the events, pretty much the important ones. Any
of these events happen on my S3 bucket, my Lambda will be triggered.
I'll acknowledge and add the trigger. Now we are telling AWS, whenever a file is
uploaded to this bucket or anything happens with this S3 bucket that we have added
as a trigger, Lambda should be invoked. No cron jobs, no manual execution, nothing.
This is a pure event driven computing. Before observing the trigger, let's quickly verify
what is going on in our CloudWatch logs. So we have only one event because we
were trying to look out for the logic if it is running properly or not.
So this is the event for that particular logic. Let's try to create a file and upload a file
inside this S3 bucket. So I've created a simple CSV file with basic rows and columns,
and I want this to be processed as part of my Lambda logic.
So I'll just go inside this bucket and I'll upload the file which I have just created. I'll
upload. Now my file is successfully uploaded.

Uploading a file is also an event. So once I upload this file, my Lambda should have
been triggered automatically and perform the logic which I wrote in Python. So let's
refresh this and open this and see if we have any events created for our Lambda.



  Page 3 of 3


OK, so this was the error which we received initially when there was no S3 trigger. So
we can ignore this. After that, we see certain logs like a new data set is uploaded on
the bucket name dseventupload.
This was the name of the file. This was the file size and the validation passed. So data
set ready for processing.
This is the statement that we have tried to print in our Python's logic. This is the exact
logic that we wanted to print if all the entire logic runs successfully on the event. Things
we need to observe over here.
We never try to run, use this test button and trigger it manually. The moment we
uploaded a file in our bucket, Lambda function automatically got triggered and it ran
this logic. Based on this logic, it has tried to collect some metrics of what is going on
with our Lambda.
So this was the error, the first error that we received, the red one. And the green one
is the one which we tried to add the trigger and rerun it, get it triggered automatically.
Post run, we have the logs also generated successfully.
This is how you trigger your Lambda automatically. When it comes to trigger, you can
add more than one trigger for your Lambda. We have added just S3.
You can add more number of triggers, like maybe you can add something related to
your DynamoDB. If any event is created in your DynamoDB, you can add that. Or
maybe you can add something related to an API gateway.
If something is happening on a particular website, someone has tried to upload a file
or someone has tried to raise a request or raise a complaint or provided a feedback.
So every type of API request, you can also add that as a trigger. So you have various
options like this that you can add as part of your trigger, as part of your trigger.
To summarise, this is a simple example of event driven data pipeline. S3 stores the
data, Lambda reacts to events happening in that trigger, and CloudWatch gives us the
visibility of what is going on. All the modern data platforms and ML pipelines are buil t
using this pattern.
Feel free to explore more and play with other options and add other triggers for more
learning. That's all.

            ---------------------------------THANK YOU--------------------------------------
