


  Page 1 of 6


Lambda configurations & iam role usage transcript

In this demonstration, we'll  understand how AWS Lambda works internally, how it is
configurations control the performance and limits, and also how the IAM rules decide
what Lambda is allowed to do. We'll do everything using the AWS console from a step-
by-step. For jumping into the La mbda, just a quick recap, Lambda has two
responsibilities, which is it runs your code and it respects the limits and permissions
that we configure.

So, configurations control how it runs and IAM controls what it can access, right? So,
since Lambda is a serverless compute service, something similar to EC2 instance, but
you don't have to maintain any servers like managing the OS, patching, or worrying
about increasing the capacity like a memory or CPU when it comes to using an AWS
Lambda. We focus only on the code and configuration, right? So, mostly AWS Lambda
is used in cases wherein you have some automation to perform any kind of file
processing or there is an event-driven task that you want to be performed instead of
manually doing it. So, automation is one of the key elements when it comes to utilising
AWS Lambda, right? So, let's create a Lambda function and try to understand
everything from scratch.

So, we have three approaches, authoring from scratch as in providing all the details
using a container image or using a blueprint of an existing Lambda application. So,
we'll author from scratch to understand how everything goes. So, we'll give it a
meaningful name, something like demo Lambda config.

So, this name becomes the identity of the function inside your AWS. Next comes the
runtime. So, here we can use maybe Python.

So, runtime decides the language and execution environment. AWS maintains this
runtime on your behalf. We're not going to instal Python ourselves, right? So, if we are
trying to run a logic inside our EC2 instance, we have to make sure that Python is
installed and then we can run any Python-based operations.

But when it comes to using AWS Lambda, you don't have to worry about setting up
and installing your runtime. So, all we have to do is select and AWS will spin up a
server from its fleet of resources and assign us a Python-based server, right? So, this
is the reason why we say that AWS Lambda, we don't have to worry about the patching
operating system or working with anything related to managing your OS. Next comes
the architecture.

So, we have two types of architectures. These architectures affect the performance
and compatibility. ARM is cheaper.




  Page 2 of 6


x86 is more widely compatible. So, usually in production x86 is preferred choice for
many projects. So, we are going to go with the same.

Next comes the execution rule. So, just to reiterate, Lambda needs permissions to do
anything in AWS. Without an IAM role, Lambda cannot even write the logs.

Now, what is the difference between IAM role and IAM user? IAM user is something
that we use for our personal tasks, like for human interactions. When we personally
want to access a service within our cloud, that is when we use IAM user. When we
want one o f the AWS service to interact with another AWS service on a temporary
basis, in those situations, we use IAM role.

So, IAM role is mostly to have two services communicate with each other. These two
services could be in one AWS account or they could be across different AWS
accounts. So, at the moment, this is my AWS account and if I want my Lambda to
communicate with an other service within this same account, I am going to use IAM
role.

I can also use it if the role is, if the service that it's supposed to communicate is in
another account, I can still use IAM role. So, here we have three options. Creating a
new role with basic Lambda permissions, which is the default setting.

Whenever you create a Lambda, an IAM role will automatically be created by default.
If you have a customised role, you can use that customised role. You can find it over
here.

Right. Then, you can also create a role for any AWS policy templates. So, this is a bit
advanced where you can provide your name and you have to choose certain policies
from the provided list.

But to avoid any complexity, we'll go with creating a new role. We'll let AWS create
necessary role, necessary permissions for us. Right.

And then comes the configuration. In the configurations, we have the networking
elements just like any other service. Right.

So, we have the VPC, we have for security. So, all of these are advanced options
which we use in production level. Using which VPC you want, what function URL you
want your Lambda to work with other services.

So, these are configured inside the additional configurations. Let's go ahead and
create a first function. So, now a Lambda function is created successfully.




  Page 3 of 6


The moment it is created, it gives us an option to access this Lambda function from
our code editor, any code editor that you have. So, Visual Studio Code is a default
one. Right.

So, there are certain steps that you need to follow. You need to just run your AWS
credentials, make sure that you are authorised to use this AWS account locally. Then
you make your code changes and you deploy and invoke this Lambda.

So, this is one way of doing it. But we can just try to use this simple approach as you're
trying to understand how things work. So, this is how the entire interface of your
Lambda looks like.

Majority of the times Lambda functions are managed through this interface because it
is easier and convenient compared to doing it locally. Right. Because the setup and
everything takes up some amount of time.

So, we prefer doing it from this interface. Now, there are a couple of tabs that we have
to manage our AWS Lambda. The first tab is the code.

This is where we write the actual logic that we want our Lambda to be performed.
Right. Then comes our test event, which is where we can verify if our code is running
properly and where we trigger our entire Lambda function.

We'll deep dive on this further in the practical lab. Let's move on to the configuration.
In configuration, you have various settings over here.

So, in this general configuration that you see, the first thing is we have memory.
Memory is not just RAM in this case. In Lambda, CPU power increases with the
memory.

So, more memory often means faster execution and lower total cost. Lambda having
more CPU is using more capacity and in return, we have to pay more bill for what we
have used. But Lambda is chargeable only when it is running.

Right. So, as long as your Lambda is not running, you will not be chargeable for it.
That is the reason it is usually considered to provide a good amount of memory over
here.

Usually, 512 would be more than enough to perform our regular day-to-day operations
using Lambda. But you also have a limit of 128 MB till proper 10,240 MB. Right.

You can also manage the storage, which again serves the same purpose. Next comes
the timeout. Timeout is the maximum execution time.




  Page 4 of 6


If the function crosses this limit, AWS kills it immediately. Timeout fails are pretty
common in production. So, the maximum timeout that you can go is 15 minutes.

Right. So, this is another key point which AWS is trying to inform the customers that
we are going to manage the servers on your behalf. We are going to scale it
automatically.

But you are not supposed to use it constantly for more than 15 minutes. Because what
happens usually in projects, we run applications or any servers that we use for our
application are run 24 by 7. So, to avoid that, we have a limitation of 15 minutes.
Whenever you are trying to use a Lambda function to automate a task, be it anything
for an API backend or it could be anything related to your event -driven task or file
processing, it should not go beyond 15 minutes.

So, it should be under 14 minutes. Your logic that you are going to write in the Lambda
function, that also has to be minimal. The goal of using Lambda should be to get the
job done as fast as possible.

That is the only way to get a job done and pay less for it. So, for that reason, you can
set a proper timeout of how much time you want the Lambda to be closed. So, usually
in production, this should not go beyond 8 or 9 minutes.

It depends from task to task and team to team how flexible they are with the billing.
So, we are just using an existing role as defined earlier. So, let us try to save these
changes.

Next comes the environment variables. In environment variables, we can add
environments depending upon our code. In production, we have multiple environments
running.

Like one environment, we have it for the production and one environment maybe we
have for development. So, you can add as many environments as you can as a key
value pair and refer to these keys as a placeholder inside your code. You do not have
to hard code them every time because this environment key might be used like 10 or
15 times in hundreds of lines of code.

So, if you decide to remove prod and keep only dev, then you have to make changes
across those multiple lines. So, to avoid that, you just mention environment and you
come back here and change it from prod to staging or whatever value you want to
replace it with. So, this is a one-stop solution to be implemented across multiple lines.

This is the reason we use environment variable. Basically, these help separate the
configuration from your code. Next is concurrency.




  Page 5 of 6


So far, we talked about how one lambda execution behaves. Now, let us talk about
how many executions can lambda run at the same time. Concurrency is nothing but
number of lambda executions running at the same time.

Let me repeat that again. Concurrency is the number of lambda executions running at
the same time. So, here we have something called as default concurrency, function
concurrency, unreserved.

So, we have multiple options in this case. By default, lambda automatically scales. If
100 events arrive, AWS can run 100 executions in parallel.

This scaling is automatic. You don't have to use any auto scaling groups in this case.
Next we have is reserved concurrency.

Reserved concurrency sets a hard limit on how many executions this function can run
at once. Like if I set the concurrency, let's say to five. So, only five executions can run
at the same time.

The sixth request will be throttled. Now, why the throttling happens in this case?
Throttling is not a crash. It means lambda saying, wait, I'm busy.

So, this reduces the load on your lambda function. The simple mental model when it
comes to understanding all of these configurations is memory controls power per
execution memory. Timeout controls how long one execution can run.

Concurrency controls how many executions can run together. Right? So, concurrency
does not make a single function faster. It only controls how many run in parallel.

Now, let's look into  the most important concept within lambda, which is permissions.
This IAM role that you see, this was auto created by AWS. This IAM role assumed by
lambda at a runtime.

In short, lambda temporarily becomes this role. Lambda itself has zero permissions.
All it is going to perform is through this role.

Before even saying yes to any operation, it is going to look into the details of this role.
Does it have the permissions? Is it authorised or not? So, if we open this role, so this
is just part of your IAM roles, just beside your users. Right? So, at the moment, it has
the basic execution role.

Right? So, we can either look from here as well. So, if we expand this, so all we have
is access to CloudWatch logs. Basically, this is used to monitor what is going on in our
lambda.




  Page 6 of 6


CloudWatch is one of the monitoring service in AWS. It helps us to create the logs of
every event that is going on and every metric that is being performed behind the
scenes. This is what allows lambda to just write the logs to CloudWatch.

Nothing else. There's no other permission added inside this particular resource. Now,
let's say I want my lambda function to interact with an S3 bucket.

Maybe there is a file present in an S3 bucket and I want my lambda to read that file.
So, for that, I need to go back to my permission, to my role, into the permissions
column. I have an option to attach policies directly.

So, from here, I can say Amazon S3. So, I can give read-only access so that if anyone
has even incorrectly written a code to delete the file from the S3, the lambda will throw
an error saying that this lambda doesn't have permissions to delete the objects from
an S3. So, all I can do is check box this and click on add permissions.

Again, the most important rule, whenever you are providing permissions or policies to
your role or user, always provide only that are needed. We have to follow the concept
of least privilege. Whatever access is needed, only that should be granted.

Others should be ignored. So, now the permissions that we have given live in the IAM,
not inside the code. These permissions are nowhere close to your code.

Right? Your code is completely different and the permissions are completely different.
So, to summarise, lambda configuration controls how the function runs. IAM role
controls what the function can access and perform.

Understanding the separation is important to build a secure and scalable serverless
systems.

-----------------------------------------------------End------------------------------------------------------
