


  Page 1 of 3


Monitoring lambda functions transcript

In this demonstration, we'll see how AWS Lambda is monitored using a CloudWatch
service. How we can observe  the metrics and logs based on the code that we are
trying to run. So, we'll try to do some real -time analysing and look out some
dashboards of how the metrics are being generated based on our execution.

So, Lambda monitoring is all about metrics tells us what happened, logs tell us why it
happened. This is the difference between metrics and logs. Both of these are part of
monitoring, but they provide us different information.

In serverless, there are no servers to assess it. Monitoring is the only way to
understand the behaviour, failures, and performance. If Lambda never runs, then
probably there are no logs to display.

So, first, we'll try to intentionally generate some logs to understand how this monitoring
works. In the code part, I've tried to add a very simple logic. Basically, what we're trying
to do is we're trying to perform a basic operation.

So, in this, I've tried to print a statement in the Lambda, which will automatically go
into the CloudWatch logs. We don't configure logging separately. AWS does it for us.

Since we already have the permissions assigned to the role attached to this Lambda,
so this role already has the permissions attached. So, if I refresh this once again, since
we have added S3 as well in the previous demonstration, so now S3 will also be
visible. So, these are the permissions attached to our Lambda.

Now, based on our logic, if I try to run it once or twice, we are going to get some logs
created. So, let's try to deploy it first. So, I've already deployed these changes.

Whenever you try to add a new code, you always have to deploy the code and then
you click on test. So, you can create a new test event in this case. So, I'll say it is a
demo event that I want to invoke.

So, I'll say save and then I'll try to invoke it. So, we have a terminal over here. So, this
was the exact message that we just tried to print regarding our Lambda.

Now, moving ahead, let's try to figure out the metrics that were consumed behind the
scenes to run this entire logic. It's a simple logic, but let's still try to understand what
happened. For that, we have to go to the monitoring column.

So, we have various graphs present over here. So, since this does not have much
impact on our Lambda, so pretty much the logs are going to be simple. So, we have
different options.



  Page 2 of 3



We can figure out what is the metrics on different time frames, one hour, three hours.
We can also use local time zone. Invocations, this graph tells us how many times the
function was called.

Duration tells us how long it ran and affected by memory and code. Errors will just give
us any failed executions that will appear. Protals, this happens when the concurrency
limits are exceeded.

Then, all of this connects directly to the concurrency configuration that we discussed
pretty much earlier. So, we have multiple more graphs like this which serve the similar
purpose. Let's get into the view logs.

So, this is what tells you why a particular event has happened. All right. So, here as
you can see, once I click on view CloudWatch logs, so we have multiple options to
look into what log groups and what streams have been created.

So, currently I'm trying to record this. So, this is the date in which I have tried to run
my log that I have created. So, if you open this log stream, so these are groups created
on a day-to-day basis.

On one day, if I try to rerun my lambda once again, another log stream will be present
with a different time frame. So, this is a way that AWS allows you to individually monitor
each lambda run. So, once we open this in a new tab, so we have the logs displ ayed
over here.

So, as you can see, we have all the details that we have mentioned. So, if I just scroll,
so whatever we are trying to perform through our lambda logic, all of that is performed.
If there were any errors, you get to see the errors as well.

And this is where you get the whole report of what happened with your log. The start
and end are added by the AWS. The lines in between are just our application logs.

So, the duration, the build duration, the memory used, every little detail that we have
are properly monitored and displayed for our convenience. This is how you just monitor
your logs. It is pretty easier to understand what is going on with your lambda.

All you have to do is trigger your lambda function from here. Once you trigger it, so
you will get a certain output, whether it is success or failure. From there, you go to the
monitoring part and you observe how the metrics are running.

So, currently we have this over here, we have some invocations, we have some
duration, which is roughly, we have some error. We do not have any error count, so



  Page 3 of 3


things are in green. Post this, you go to the view cloud watch logs and you can analyse
clearly what happened with that lambda trigger.

So, since it is on the same day, if I open this once again, close the previous tabs, so
now you have more logs. So, this is the new set of logs. So, this is our first run and
this is our second run.

So, as many times you run, you get the whole result over here. You can expand all of
them at once and see if it was successful or failed or stuck at any step. You can
observe everything.

-----------------------------------------------------End------------------------------------------------------
