Bert follows a transformer approach,
while Vader looks at individual words,
Bert looks at the entire sentence for
context. Remember bidirectional. The
advantage here is that Bert understands
sarcasm, complex negation, and other
complexities much better than Vader.
We will be using the hugging face
pipeline, which downloads a BIRT model
already fine-tuned on millions of
reviews. That's all for this video.
I'll see you in the next one. Thank you.
Welcome back learners. Now that we
implemented sentiment analysis with
NLTK, let's explore sentiment analysis
with BERT, a more advanced model. All
right, learners, in this video, let's
implement sentiment analysis with the
BERT model, right? It is the more
modern version rather than the
traditional method that we saw in the
last video. Cool. Before beginning,
just go to this website
huggingface.co/settings/tokens and
generate an API key and add it here.
Write hf_ token here and then paste
your key here, right, and enable this.
What this will do is it will access the
hugging face environment to download
whatever model that you want to do. In
this case we will download the
sentiment analysis model, right? I've
already done that. So here are the
weights. Now let's go ahead
We have the model set up. Let's now
implement it on our test sentences.
It's the same set of sentences that
we've used previously.
OK, so implementation is rather
straightforward. What we'll do is we
will. Use the sentiment pipeline, which
we have initialised here.
We will pass the text which is the
sentence in this list.
And we will put truncation to true,
right?
Truncation to true handles, texts that
are longer than 5 and 2 tokens, so you
can use large text for your
experimentation as well.
All right, so now, we will capture the
label and we will capture the score.
Let's see it in action.
OK, so For the text, I love this
product. The label was positive, which
is here.
And the score is 0.9999, right? This is
the worst experience ever. The
confidence score is 0.99, almost 99.9%,
right? It's a negative.
Now check this out. The movie was OK,
nothing special, 0.9925, a little less
than the previous course. The
confidence is a little lower, but still
very high, so it's a negative sentiment.
I usually hate waiting, but this was
worth it. The confidence is 99.98. And
the label is positive. The food was
good, but the service was terrible,
negative, right? And the confidence is
also fairly high, not as high as
99.999%, but still very high. So this
was our implementation of sentiment
analysis using the BIRT model. You know
what you need to do now? Expand this
test case, add sentences from the
internet, and run it again and get some
hands on, all right?
