


  Page 1 of 4


               S3 Website Hosting Transcript
Module 8, Lesson 3, Practical Lab. In this practical lab, we'll  create an S3 bucket,
configure permissions securely and host a static website accessible from the internet.
Before we dive deep into this demonstration, I just want to jog your memory that S3 is
an object storage.
It is not a server. So S3 stores objects like HTML, images, videos, backups and logs.
It doesn't run your code.
It only serves the files. But S3 has an option wherein if you have a static file, you can
host it onto the internet. Just like you do on a EC2 instance or any other remote server.
So in this demonstration, what we are going to experience is we are going to create
an S3 bucket into our AWS account. We'll try to upload a HTML file which has all the
details related to our website. After that, once we upload the file, we have certain
options within our S3 which helps us to enable this website hosting.
Post enabling it, we'll try to observe if that particular website is accessible over the
internet or not. So anyone who has access to that URL post enabling the option can
have a proper access to your website. So this is the exact flow which we are going to
demonstrate in today's practical activity.
Once logging into your AWS account, go with the S3, you can type here or you can
use it from the bottom. The search for S3, you have an option called as create bucket.
So once you give a create bucket, let's try to start creating a bucket with some options.
First is the bucket name. Let's give something that's meaningful. So I would say my
static website demo.
Then we land on to block public access settings for this bucket. This is always enabled
by default because S3 usually has a very secure information in these buckets. But in
our case, we are trying to upload a file which we wanted to be publicly accessible on
the internet.
For the same reason, we can unbox it, acknowledge the warning and we can just
create the bucket. You can leave the other options as usual. So these are additional
security measurements for the encryption.
This is for the versioning. So all of these are additional layers to keep your items inside
your bucket secure. So we can avoid that since we want everything to be public inside
this bucket.
So we go with create bucket. The name already exists. So let's say we give some
unique name to this.
All right. Now we have an S3 bucket. And there are different ways to manage the
permissions for this.



  Page 2 of 4



So we have three types to manage the permission. The first one is IAM policies, which
is recommended by AWS. Then we have bucket policies, which is also recommended.
The other one is ACL access control list. If you observe when we are trying to create
an S3 bucket, we had this option for access control list. So this is disabled and it is
recommended because this needs to be done manually by a user.
So there are good chances that it  could lead to many human errors. For that reason,
AWS allows us to use IAM or bucket policies rather than access control list, ACLs,
which could lead to a human error. Now let's try to actually get inside our bucket and
upload a file.
So we have an option called as upload and add the file. So my file is present on the
desktop. This is the file which I want to upload inside this file.
I have all the information related to my website, how it should look, what colours to
use, how much font size to use, all that details, I have it inside this file. So now that
my uploading is successful, let's go back to our bucket. From the bucket, if you  go to
the properties and scroll to extreme bottom, you have something called as static
website hosting, which means whatever file is present, a HTML file that can be used
to convert it into a website using S3.
We say static because it can't be modified or it can't be edited. You always have to
upload a new file and delete the existing one. So there's no dynamic approach when
it comes to hosting your files as a website using this S3 service.
So once we enable it, we have an option called as enable. So here we'll go with host
a static website, right? Index documentation. We can just give the name of the file and
do the same for error document.
You can also skip this. This particular is not needed, but you can add both of those
and click on save changes. So S3 now behaves like a web server for static files.
If you scroll to extreme bottom, we have a URL created by the AWS. So this is an
actual URL, a hyperlink, which our file that we have uploaded. It is converted into a
URL.
But before going ahead and pasting this URL into the website, we need to set some
permissions. For that, we have to go back to the permissions tab. We have something
called as bucket policy.
So bucket policies will define what access should be given, who should be able to do
what operation with this website. So usually we use a JSON formatted code to define
our bucket policies. That is a whole new different concept.
So it will look something similar to this. So here we are just trying to allow only the
read permission to this website. Right.



  Page 3 of 4



So here I'll just give my name over here. So this is the resource that I want it to be
public, publicly available, which should have only read only access. So I can either
allow or deny coming to the principle who can do it when I mention a star.
It means anyone anyone with this URL can use it. So this is exactly how the policy
looks like. And all it does is this policy allows anyone to read my website.
Nothing more than that. Right. So now let's try to save the changes.
There's something which we have missed out. All right. So now my changes are saved.
Let's go back to the properties. Scroll down. And if we try to open this URL, which was
created.
So if we open this into a if I copy this and just paste it over here, we are going to see
our website's content, which we have created. Right. So this is the website which I just
try to summarise what we are going to do in this demonstration.
So this is how your regular website, a regular file, which is a normal index dot HTML
file that we created inside our bucket. So this file is now converted into an actual
website. Right.
So just to be on the safer side, since this is going to be chargeable to keep our file
inside our bucket for a longer duration of time, we can delete and clean up our
resource. Right. So just to summarise what we have done before the cleanup, we used
Amazon S3 to host a static website by controlling access with a bucket policy.
This pattern is widely used for landing pages or documentation or any front end
hosting. In production environments, this setup is often combined with a service called
as Amazon CloudFront, which is also a global content delivery service by AWS that
caches the content at the edge locations for a better and faster delivery. CloudFront
is commonly used alongside Amazon S3 to improve performance and enhance the
security.
So feel free to explore the CloudFront service further at your own pace. So this is the
entire content which we have discussed so far. Right.
So now our website is live and accessible. Anyone who has access to this website can
also go through this entire content. They can't make any change, but they will have
the read only access.
Let's try to quickly delete and clean up our resource. In S3 bucket, when it comes to
cleaning up your resources, your bucket should be empty before you delete it. If there
is any object inside it, it will not allow you to delete.
So if I currently I have my index.html file. If I go ahead and delete it, it's going to throw
me an error saying that the bucket is not empty. So before that, I had to make sure
that my file is deleted.



  Page 4 of 4


Quickly delete this. All right. So now my file, my objects are empty inside my bucket.
Now it will allow me to delete this bucket. So this is how you can use S3 to host and
launch your websites. The URL can be shared with anyone.
But in exchange, if you're keeping that file inside your S3 bucket, it is going to be
chargeable after a certain time. That's all.


            ---------------------------------THANK YOU--------------------------------------
