


  Page 1 of 9



           DB Hands-On Practice Transcript
Module 9, Lesson 3, Practical Lab. In this practical lab, we'll create a relational
database, we'll perform some crude operations just to understand how to interact with
our database from the AWS account. Then understand backups and we'll compare it
with a NoSQL database using DynamoDB.
Post that, we'll interact with it from an interface level and also from a CLI level so that
we can understand what are the different approaches to communicate and get the job
done related to our databases. Quick recap, before we dive into the practicals, R DS
is a Structured Relational SQL Database. DynamoDB is a key value approach wherein
it is completely serverless and a NoSQL database.
So let's get started. To demonstrate with the RDS, we are going to use the same setup
that we have done earlier for our two-tier architecture demonstration. We are going to
create an Amazon RDS, we'll use a database engine, configure the security group.
Then to interact with this RDS, we are going to create an EC2 instance, do an SSH
and communicate with our RDS through that EC2 instance. So let's quickly do that.
We'll go ahead and create an RDS database.
We'll go with the same approach with the free tier. So all of this that I'm doing over
here, this is something that we have already done in that demonstration. So I'm just
trying to do the same thing again.
Here we'll create our own security group because we can't use an existing one, or
maybe I have that old security group. Yes. So I have the security group available.
So I'm just going to use the security group. We'll use the default VPC and we'll create
our database. All right.
This might take a couple of minutes. In the meantime, we'll go ahead and create our
EC2 instance as well, so that we can communicate with this RDS. Go to launch
instance, we'll give a similar name like last time, which is web server.
We'll use the Linux AMI, we'll use the free tier instance type. Key pair, we can use this.
I have it ready.
I'll use the same security group, which we have configured last time. All right. So just
to reiterate what we have done so far.
So I have created a database, an RDS database, whose security group is configured
in a way that any request coming in from this EC2 instance, only those requests will
be processed. Only this is added as a source to consider the request and process all
the operations. So for this relational database in the security group that we have



  Page 2 of 9


created, that we have used in the previous demonstration, the source for this will be
the web security group, which means the security group used for this web server.
So we're just coming to this security group. If we take a quick look at this, I'll go to
security, we'll open the security group. All right.
The inbound rule is we have an SSH connection to this particular web server. In the
previous demonstration, we also had an additional inbound rule, which was HTTP.
Since we were trying to keep it open for the Internet to reach out to our EC2 instance
for any kind of front end websites or any other public operations we kept.
So for this one, since we do not have any such requirement. So I've just deleted that
HTTP inbound rule and I've left the SSH so that we can communicate with this and
basically interact with our DynamoDB. So let's see our instance is running.
See if our DynamoDB is taking time, let's refresh it once again. So if you're doing it for
the first time, make sure you click on this view connection details and go through the
save this username and password. Once it is created and active, you won't be able to
see these details.
So if you're just trying to practise it, make sure you give a very simple password and
a simple username, something which you could remember. We'll give it a couple of,
we'll give it one or two minutes and. We'll see if it is working.
All right. So our DB is successfully created. So it is taking a backup of our database,
which is being created.
So we'll discuss this backup part in a couple of minutes. So whenever a new resource,
a new database is created, it will automatically take a backup of your database. So
this is an automated database that is.
Done through AWS side, we can also take our own database at our own manual effort.
We'll see that in a couple of minutes. But now, since it is pretty much our database is
ready, it will be done in a couple of minutes.
In the meantime, let's connect to our EC2 instance and interact with our RDS. So we
have two approaches. One is through the browser and one is through your SSH client,
which you can do it locally by running this command and this command.
So just to save time, we'll just go with this. I've logged into my EC2 instance. So we
have to set up our MySQL engine before we go ahead.
So we do not have it. So let's try to quickly run the same command, which is sudo m
instal MariaDB FNY. So we are using MariaDB client over here to run our MySQL.
It should take a couple of seconds, I believe. All right. So now it is done.




  Page 3 of 9


Let's try to verify once again if everything is successfully configured. OK, so it is set
up clearly. Now, let's try to communicate and interact with our RDS.
So the command is mysql-h. We need the endpoint over here. So we go to our RDS,
click on our database.
And on the connectivity and security, we have an endpoint. So we copy it from here.
Paste the endpoint.
Then we provide the username and the password. All right. So now I'm inside my RDS.
The same if I run this exact command from my local terminal or the command prompt,
it is going to throw an error saying as access denied because our personal laptops or
systems are not considered as a source to interact with this MySQL engine. Right.
Only this EC2 instance security group is allowed as a source.
That's the reason we had to interact and run this command within our EC2 instance.
So now that our EC2 instance is able to communicate with our RDS, let's try to do
some crude operations. Let's create a database.
I'll say again appdb. So let's use this appdb. All right.
Now, let's try to create a table with a primary key and auto increment as well. Give it a
name, something like range. All right.
So we're just trying to create a table user with the name, ID and email. All right. So
let's try to insert something into this.
So all the operations that I'm trying to do over here is pretty much what we do on a
day to day basis, how we interact with our DBs. All right. So I'll provide my name or
maybe since we provided an email, I'll say at the rate gmail.com. Right.
So let's try to just verify if things are going as expected. OK, so we can see now the
similar way we can update or even delete the user ID as well. Right.
So this is a classic relational crude operation which we are trying to work with the rows,
columns and SQL. Right. Same similar fashion, whatever operations that we want are
we want to be performed with our RDS.
This is how we interact with our RDS through EC2 instance and do all the operations.
Now, let's try to look into the backup of how this works. So initially, this is our database.
When you go to this section, you find something like maintenance and backups. So
this is managed by AWS. Right.

So whenever you want to use this snapshot, like someone has it by default, they might
have deleted some, deleted the resources or any information which is critical. All you
have to do is checkbox and restore. This is how you can do it.



  Page 4 of 9


Push this after a couple of, after a couple of duration, after some duration of time. If
you want to take a manual snapshot of this entire DB, then you can still go to actions
and select take a snapshot. It will give you options whether you want to take a
snapshot of your DB instance or the entire cluster.
Right. So you provide the name like restored version demo DB. This was the default
one, which was automated by AWS.
And this snapshot is the one which we have created just now manually. This is how
you can manage and make sure that your databases are properly backed up and have
each and every detail without any disaster. So snapshots are manual backups,
automated backups allow you point in time recovery, which means until a certain
period of time, let's say until 30 days or for the last 10 days or five days, whatever we
have, we get, we can restore that version of our database.
So the key line here is backups are managed. No cron jobs or anything is needed in
this case. This is how we work with a relational database, AWS RDS.
Now, let's jump into a NoSQL database. Which is DynamoDB. So DynamoDB works
on a key value.
Right. So we have two ways to create a DynamoDB table. The first one is to do it
manually by clicking on this create table.
We give it a name like demo DB partition key we can use as user ID. You can leave
the default settings and you click on create table. Now, let's try to explore the items.
So when we want to add some items into this table, we go to explore items. If I scan
the entire DB. So I don't have any items as of now because we just created a table.
We go to create items. We have two approaches to add the items either through this
manual approach or if you are aware of how to use JSON, we can just code the entire
part over here. Right.
So for simplicity, I'll just use this approach. So we'll add three attributes. First is user
ID.
Let's say I'll keep it as 001. Maybe a name and email. I'll take the same example so
that it's easy to map it.
So you click on create and your item will be created over here. Right. Similarly, let's
try to add one more item, say 002.

So this is how we have our items. Now we can query these just like we do through our
regular tables. But here we go with the manual approach.
So we go with query. Let's say I want to get the information of user ID who has 002.
So you can see that the user ID is 002 and the user ID is 001.



  Page 5 of 9


So this is how you get the information populated for that particular user. This is how
you use your DynamoDB manually. Now, let's try to do this exact approach through a
CLI.
For that, we need to get back to our EC2 instance. So let me connect to it. All right.
So now to connect to my DynamoDB from a CLI, I can either do it from here or I can
even do it through my command prompt as well. Since I have the EC2 instance
running, we can use this. Run AWS configure.
Make sure that you are authorised to create a DynamoDB table. Right. So for this, it
is going to ask you access key.
Secret key. It will ask you a default region. And then what type of an output format do
you want? Right.
So this is how it is going to ask. So let's try to do this once again. So coming to the
access key, I need to go to my IAM user to get these all of these details that are
requested.
So let me head back to my IAM. I'll go to users. So this is my own user ID.
So we'll create a dummy user ID and provide the necessary permissions. I'll checkbox
this. I'll use some auto-generated password.
That should be fine. I'll say attach policies directly. And I'm going to provide
administrative access.
Right. So for here in production, usually it is not recommended to provide
administrative access directly. Right.
So it is. We always follow a process called leased privilege, provide only the access
which is needed. In this case, we are trying to create a DynamoDB table from our CLI.
So if I go to Dynamo, if I search for DynamoDB, I can just provide full access regarding
DynamoDB. Right. But since I'm trying to demonstrate, I don't want to go back and
forth for all the permissions.
So. I'm giving it an administrative access for now. So I'll go next and create the user.
Now my user is created. I'll just download this details. I'll return to the user list.
So now I have my user over here. So we still need the access key and the secret key
required. So I go to security credentials.

Scroll down for this particular user. There are no such accounts. So I had to create a
user.
We're using it for the CLI command line interface. So I'll  choose that. Checkbox this
and go with next.



  Page 6 of 9


I'll say. Demonstrating DynamoDB via CLI. So now I have my access key and the
secret key.
Make sure you download the CSV file and save it if you're going to use this same user
again and again. Right. So do not expose these keys to anyone because anyone who
has access to this can perform any actions that you on within your AWS account.
So always keep this secure or deactivate and create a new ones. Right. So I'll just
copy this access key.
I'll paste it over here. Then I'll go with the secret key for the region. I'll say US East 1
and go with Jason for the output.
All right. So now. I'm configured and now I am telling to this particular terminal that I
am configured.
My IAM role has the permissions to create DynamoDB table. And these are the
credentials for you to verify. So now that it is verified.
Let's try to create our first DynamoDB table. Whenever we create this there is a certain
format that we use to create all the details. So it looks something similar to this.
So here all we're trying to do is provide all the necessary information required to create
a DynamoDB table. Right. So when we were trying to create our table from here all
we did was provide a table name a partition key.
Some settings over here since we are doing it through the command line interface.
We need to add a couple of details specifically at how we want to configure our
DynamoDB. So for that reason all I have done is I'm mentioning that I have created a
DynamoDB table and the table name is going to be app underscore events.
And these will be the definition of attributes. So in this case we are using user ID and
event time. In the manual approach we used user ID name and email.
So here we are just using user ID and event time. Right. And then the key schema for
these two attributes for user ID and the event time.
Right. So who generated the event is what the user ID is all about. When the event
happened is what the event time is all about.
Right. And this is the building model that we are opting for. So once I click on hit enter
so my table is created right.
So here if I go back to my DynamoDB. Go back to tables. Just try to refresh it.

Observe if the table is active or not. OK. So this is the table which we have just created
through our CLI.



  Page 7 of 9


Right. So this is the table which has if you go to the explore table items we won't be
having any attributes inside this because we again did not create any items for this
through our CLI. Right.
So we can add verify add the put we can do put item we can query we can update all
can be done through CLI in the same format that we have done over here. Right. You
don't have to memorise this format.
You have a proper documentation of AWS of where and how you can what all details
are required. What are the necessary. Necessary formats to use everything is present
in that documentation so you can just copy paste and refer it.
So this makes it easy for you to interact with your RDS or DynamoDB from any location
that you want whether it is your personal laptop or it is a remote server. All you have
to make sure is there is a proper authorisation between both the resources and you r
AWS account your user in IAM has the necessary permissions assigned. These are
the prerequisites that you should be doing.
Now let's look into the backup for DynamoDB. So when I go to my tables let's say I go
with the demo DB which we created we have something called as backups for
DynamoDB. It follows the concept of PITR point in time recovery.
So this is again this will give you a recovery of up to 35 days. Any operation performed
in the last 35 days all of that will be backed up and you can restore it to those versions.
So all we have to do is go to edit it turn on the point in time recovery.
We select the date the number of days. How long do we want it. The maximum is 35
days.
You can save changes and now our backup is enabled. Right. So if we go to our
explore table items when I scan over here.
So currently we have two items inside our DynamoDB. If we intentionally try to delete
one of them that record will be stored inside our backups. And when we try to restore
it we get the same details as it is.
So AWS has multiple approaches and a very convenient approaches to take a backup
of our tables and databases. If you go back to our backups now we have an option to
restore whenever something goes wrong whenever some particular action is not it's
not something that you desire and you want it to restore. All you have to do is click on
restore and that data will be displayed for you.
The only difference when it comes to DynamoDB is it is going to create a new table
rather than adding the missing items inside the existing table. That is the only
difference. Right.




  Page 8 of 9


So this is how you can manage your backups with RDS and DynamoDB. So to quickly
summarise what we have learned today through this practical demonstration when it
comes to data model RDS follows tables and rows. DynamoDB follows key value.
For query language RDS follows SQL. DynamoDB follows API based query. Schema
is fixed for RDS but it is flexible for DynamoDB.
When it comes to backups RDS follows snapshots which is automated or manual. For
DynamoDB we have point in time recovery. Coming to use cases RDS is used for
transactional data.
DynamoDB is used for high scale applications something which you want to record
the event of a user the login the timestamps what events are they performing when
you want these type of high scale applications to be performed. That is where you use
DynamoDB. So you choose based on the access pattern rather than the preference.
So to summarise we used RDS for structured transactional data and DynamoDB for
high scale serverless workloads. Both of them solve different problems and the
modern applications often use both together. Right.
So these are a combination which serves your modern cloud architectures. Before we
wrap up make sure that you clean out all of your resources that you have created to
avoid any billing. So we'll quickly go ahead and clear out the resources as well.
So DynamoDB is cleared. Let's clear out our RDS also. This is a very important step
especially when you're trying to learn if these resources are left active.
Then the billing will definitely surprise you. So make sure that you avoid spending any
money on this. We have a snapshot before this.
Let's try to clear the snapshots also. Let's give it some time until the snapshots are
completely removed. Then we'll remove the databases.
So we'll head back to our EC2 instance and terminate the EC2 instances. You can
leave the security groups security groups. You don't invite any charges so you can
leave them as it is.
So we go to terminate. Do not use stop instance. Even though you go with stop
instance it is only going to stop processing the task.
But since it is still under your account you will be charged for it. So always to avoid
any billing always terminate the instance. All right.
We'll also clear out this users. Cleanup is one of the necessary actions. Whenever
you're trying to perform.
Since I have access key over here it will prompt you to deactivate the access key first
and then you can delete it. So make sure you deactivate and then delete the user.
Right.



  Page 9 of 9



Let's get back to our RDS key value pairs and security groups can be ignored. All right.
So my RDS is also cleaned up.
So make sure you clean up all the resources before you end your learning.


            ---------------------------------THANK YOU--------------------------------------
