Welcome to lesson 3. So far we have
talked about the 3 V's of big data
volume, velocity, and variety, and how
they force us to rethink our systems.
You might be thinking, what's up, why
can't I just buy the most expensive,
powerful computer on the market? If my
data grows, I will just add more RAM
and a faster CPU. It sounds logical,
right? But today, we're going to look
at the wall or the barrier. We are
going to see why even the most
expensive single computers eventually
hit a physical limit that they just
cannot cross. First, let's talk about
the CPU, the brain of the computer. For
decades, CPUs got faster and faster
every year, but around 2005, something
happened. We hit a physical limit. To
make a CPU faster, you have to pack
more transistors closer together. But
when they get too close, they generate
so much heat that the chip would
literally melt. We also hit the speed
of light limit. Signals can only travel
across a chip so fast. Let's look at an
industry example. High frequency
trading in the world of stock trading
companies used to spend millions to get
a CPU that is 0.1% faster, but today
they have realised they can't have one
brain work any faster. Instead, they
have to use many brains working
together at the same time. One person
can only read a book so fast, but 100
people can read 100 pages
simultaneously. And the next is RAM or
memory. This is your computer's working
desk. As you add more RAM to a single
machine, two things happen. First, the
cost doesn't just go up, it explodes.
It is exponential. Like 1 TB RAM stick
is significantly more than twice the
price of 512 GB1.
Second, we hit a memory wall.
Even if you have 10 TB of RAM, the path
between CPU and the RAM is like a
narrow one lane road. No matter how
much data is on the desk, the brain can
grab it so fast. Finally, we have IO
input output, which is how fast data
moves from the disc or the network into
the computer. This is usually the
slowest part. Imagine a massive library,
which is your hard drive, and a tiny
window where you check out books like
your o port. Even if you have the
world's fastest reader. If the
librarian can only hand out one book
per minute, the system is slow. This is
all about barrier in the hardware. I'll
see you in the next lesson. Till then,
happy learning.
