Seeing his advantage given away, Duryodhana insists on one more throw of the 
dice. Yudhishthira agrees to a final game, but once again, he loses. The Pandavas 
and Draupadi are condemned to spend twelve years in exile in the forest, and a 
thirteenth year in an unknown place, disguised so that no one may recognize 
them. If anyone does, then they must spend another twelve years in exile.  
 
PART TWO: EXILE  
Books 3-5 tell of the twelve years of living in the forest, preceding the great war. 
The Pandavas are not alone in the wilderness but are followed by many loyal 
brahmins and servants. The gods give them an inexhaustible plate of food to feed 
all of them.  
Throughout the epic, the importance of brahmins, the priestly caste, is 
emphasized. Yudhishthira wants to regain his kingdom so that he can provide for 
10,000 brahmins. One must never refuse a brahmin anything (see the incident 
between Karna and Indra below).  
The Importance of Dharma
Draupadi and Bhima reproach Yudhishthira for his inaction and resigned 
passivity. Since it is obvious that Shakuni cheated at dice, wouldn't it be better to 
stand up and fight? Yudhishthira flatly refuses. He will keep his word: he resolves 
to follow his dharma. Dharma (variously translated as social duty, righteousness, 
or universal order) is the moral obligation which each human being should 
recognize and follow. Failure to do so could endanger the course of the cosmos 
as a whole.  
  
Draupadi cannot understand why they are suffering so, if they are the righteous 
ones. If everything happens by the will of god, then why do the good suffer? It 
seems only the powerful escape harm, not the righteous. Yudhishthira corrects 
her: "None should ever perform virtue with a desire to gain its fruits. Such a sinful 
trader of virtue will never reap the results. ... Do not doubt virtue because you do 
not see its results. Without doubt, the fruits of virtue will be manifest in time, as 
will the fruits of sin. The fruits of true virtue are eternal and indestructible" (KD 
245-6).  
Preparations for War
Arjuna then leaves, aiming for the highest mountains to look for the celestial 
weapons they will need during the war. He meets the god Shiva who gives him 
powerful weapons. Arjuna then spends five years with his father the divine Indra 
learning to use the weapons fighting demons.  
  
