• 
For more information, see Bhagavad Gita On-Line and Bhagavad Gita home 
page  
  
On a hill overlooking the battlefield, Dhritarashtra hears the words of Krishna 
through his aid Sanjaya, who has been granted the ability to see and hear 
everything that happens in the battle, to relate these things to the blind king. 
Dhritarashtra shudders when he hears of Krishna’s theophany, fearing that 
nothing can stop the Pandavas with such a powerful being on their side. But he 
takes some comfort in knowing that Krishna cannot accomplish everything he 
wants, as he failed to arrange a peaceful solution to the conflict.  
Before the battle, Yudhishthira goes to both his teachers, Bhishma and Drona: “O 
invincible one, I bow to you. We will fight with you. Please grant us your 
permission and give us your blessing.” For this sign of respect, both men pray 
for the Pandavas’ victory, even though they must out of loyalty fight on the side 
of the Kauravas.  
The Battle Begins
Bhishma compares the invincible Arjuna to “the Destroyer himself at the end of 
the Yuga.” (CN 126) In one confrontation, Arjuna splits Bhishma’s bow with four 
arrows, and Bhishma praises him: “O son of Pandu, well done! I am pleased with 
you for this wonderful feat.  Now fight your hardest with me” (KD 581). However, 
he is unable to overcome Bhishma. After nine days of fighting, the Pandavas visit 
Bhishma by night; they tell him that, unless he is killed in the war, the carnage 
will carry on until the end of the world.  
  
When asked how he can be defeated, he advises them to place Sikhandi in the 
front line, from where he will be able to fire freely at Bhishma. Sikhandi is actually 
a woman, Amba whom Bhishma had refused to marry and who vowed to be his 
death. Amba practiced asceticism, standing on one toe in the snow for 12 years 
to learn the secret of Bhishma's death. Amba threw herself into the fire and was 
reborn from flames as Drupada’s second daughter, later changing sex with a 
demon to become a man   
The next day, confronted by Sikhandi, Bhishma refuses to fight a woman, and he 
abandons his weapons. Against the rules of war, the Pandavas strike the 
unarmed warrior with thousands of arrows. There is no space on his body thicker 
than two fingers that is not pierced. He falls from his chariot, and lies fully 
supported by the arrows, with no part of his body touching the earth. Bhishma 
does not actually die until much later, at his choosing. He remains lying on a bed 
of arrows until the end of the battle.  
Drona takes command  
