• 
"No creature is more sinful than woman; women are the root of all evil; she 
is poison, she is a snake, she is fire," but at the same time, "Righteousness 
of men depends on women. All pleasures and enjoyments depend on 
women." 
• 
Cows constitute the stairs that lead to heaven; cows are goddesses able to 
grant every wish; nothing in the world superior; one should never go to 
bed or rise in the morning without reciting the names of cows." Cows 
provide cleansing from sin. "There is nothing unattainable for one who is 
devoted to cows" (this goes on for about 50 pages). 
• 
1000 names of Vishnu (26 pages) 
• 
Shortly after, Arjuna tells Krishna that he has forgotten his teaching 
(contained in the Bhagavad Gita) so for 36 chapters this advice is repeated. 
Now that all her sons are dead, 
Gandhari's eyes are so charged with 
grief that, by looking under her 
blindfold, her emotion sears the 
flesh of Yudhishthira's foot. She 
curses Krishna, whom she holds 
responsible for all of the tragedy that 
has befallen them: the Pandava 
kingdom will fall in 36 years. Even 
Krishna will die; he shall be killed by 
a passing stranger. Krishna calmly 
accepts this curse, then tells her that 
a light has been saved, even if she 
cannot see it. Yudhishthira agrees to 
reign.  
Thirty-six years pass, and 
Yudhishthira arrives at the entrance 
to paradise, carrying a dog in his arms. His brothers and Draupadi, who left the 
earth with him, have fallen from the mountains into the abyss along the way. A 
gatekeeper tells him to abandon the dog if he wants to enter paradise. He refuses 
to leave a creature so faithful, and is permitted to enter, for this was a test, the 
dog was the god Dharma in disguise. In paradise, further surprises await him. His 
enemies are there, smiling and contented. His brothers and Draupadi, on the 
other hand, seem to be in a place of suffering and torment. Why? Yudhishthira 
decides to stay with his loved ones in hell, rather than enjoy the delights of 
heaven with his enemies. This too was a test, the “final illusion.” They are all 
permitted to enter paradise.  
• 
In Hindu thought, neither heaven (svarga) or hell are eternal, but only 
intervals between rebirths. Everyone must first spend some time in hell (or 
