As tension mounts between the cousins, Krishna makes his appearance. It is said 
he may be an incarnation of the god Vishnu, the preserver, come down to save 
the earth from chaos. The appearance of Krishna introduces a major theme in the 
epic: dharma (cosmic order) menaced by chaos, so Krishna must step in, 
indicating that this is not just a family rivalry, but a conflict with universal 
consequences.  
• 
In the medieval Puranas, the story developed that Vishnu had appeared on 
earth nine times in the past as an avatar or incarnation, in order to set the 
world back on the right path, and would appear again at the end of the age. 
• 
Krishna’s deification in the Mahabharata may be based on later 
interpolations into the text, as there is considerable tension in the epic 
between the depiction of the divine Krishna and the human prince who acts 
as counselor to the Pandavas, gives devious advice, and eventually dies. 
On Krishna's advice the Pandavas present themselves to the blind king. To make 
peace, Dhritarashtra offers them half the kingdom, but in a region which was 
nothing but jungle and desert. Yudhishthira accepts his offer in the hope of 
averting a war.  
Meanwhile, Arjuna and Krishna agree to assist a hungry brahmin, who reveals 
himself to be Agni, god of fire. He wants to consume a nearby forest which is 
protected by Indra’s rain. Agni rewards Krishna with his discus and Arjuna with 
Varuna’s bow Gandiva along with an inexhaustible supply of arrows. With these 
he is able to create a canopy of arrows to keep the rain from putting out Agni's 
fire. Even Indra cannot defeat Arjuna, because Krishna is with him (an indication 
of Vishnu's superiority over Indra by this time). Maya (not god of illusion but an 
asura or demon who escaped the fires) out of gratitude builds the great hall of 
Indraprastha.  
Living in their new territory of Indraprastha, Yudhishthira turns poor land into a 
wealthy kingdom, and declares himself King of Kings. Duryodhana is jealous and 
humiliated on his visit to the magnificent palace, where he mistakes a glass floor 
for a pool, then later falls into a pool thinking it is glass. Draupadi and Bhima 
laugh at him. He returns home bent on devising their destruction.  
The Dice Game and the Humiliation of Draupadi
Duryodhana follows the advice of his uncle, the cunning Shakuni, an infamous 
dice player, and invites Yudhishthira to a game, knowing full well that gambling is 
his cousin's one weakness. Yudhishthira accepts.  
  
• 
Duryodhana is not an original thinker, always relying on other’s ideas. His 
uncle gave him the idea for the arson and the dice game. (Later during the 
