Santanu, king of Hastinapura, was married to the beautiful Ganga, who was the 
river goddess in disguise. She agreed to marry him as long as he never 
questioned her actions. Over the years they had seven sons, but Ganga threw 
each one into the river. Santanu was distressed but he kept his promise. Finally, 
when their eighth son was born, Santanu asked his wife who she really was and 
why she had done this. Ganga revealed herself and told that her children had 
once been celestial beings, but were cursed to become human. She had ended 
their “punishment” quickly by drowning them immediately at birth. But since 
Santanu had questioned her actions, she left him, along with his last son 
Devarata.  
Devarata is better known by his later name Bhishma. He receives this name, 
which means “of terrible resolve,” after vowing never to marry or have children. 
His father wanted to marry again (Satyavati, mother of Vyasa), but the conditions 
of the marriage were that the second wife would be the mother of a king 
someday. Honoring his father's wishes, Bhishma makes his vow, guaranteeing 
that neither he nor a son of his will challenge the claim to the throne.  
Years later, one of Bhishma’s half-brothers dies in battle, and the other becomes 
old enough to marry. On behalf of his half-brother, Bhishma abducts three sisters 
and fights off all their suitors. On returning home, he learns that one of the 
sisters, Amba, had already chosen a suitor. Bhishma allows her to leave, but her 
betrothed does not want her any more. Now abandoned, she returns to Bhishma 
and demands that he marry her. Ever faithful to his vow, Bhishma refuses. Amba 
then vows that one day she will kill him, even though the gods have granted 
Bhishma the power to choose the day of his death, because of his vow.  
The importance and power of vows are evident throughout the epic. Once stated, 
a vow becomes the truth and must be fulfilled, no matter what else may happen. 
When his father and both his half-brothers die prematurely without children, 
Bhishma refuses to marry his step-brother's widows (Amba’s sisters). He will not 
relinquish his vow, even though his celibacy makes no difference anymore.  
The young princesses must be given children, but who can father them? There 
are no other men in the family besides Bhishma, and he has renounced women. 
So Satyavati, the king's second wife, asks her first-born son, Vyasa the poet, to 
give children to the two princesses. He goes to them, but the princesses dislike 
him, for as an ascetic who has taken a vow of poverty, he is filthy and smells. He 
explains to them that they will each bear a son: however, the first will be born 
blind because the first princess closed her eyes when seeing him, and the 
second will be pale-skinned because the second princess became pale at his 
touch. The blind son is called Dhritarashtra, the pale one is Pandu. Vyasa has a 
third son Vidura by a handmaiden.  
