Meanwhile Karna decides he too must acquire a celestial weapon, so for many 
months he serves a powerful brahmin, Parasurama, who hates warriors. As a 
reward, he bestows upon Karna, whom he takes to be a servant, a formula for the 
supreme weapon. But Karna reveals himself to be a warrior by an excess of 
bravery, as he does not cry out when a worm bores a hole into his thigh. 
Parasurama curses him so he will forget the secret formula at the moment he 
wishes for the weapon, and that will be the moment of his death.  
• 
In the Medieval Puranas, Parasurama becomes one of the avatars of 
Vishnu, but there is no indication of that aspect in the epic. 
Karna later meets Indra (Arjuna's divine father) in the disguise of a brahmin. 
Having sworn never to refuse a brahmin's request, he agrees to surrender his 
divine covering of golden armor given him at birth. He tears off the armor from 
his skin, bleeding, and trades it for another mighty weapon, which will kill any 
being but can only be used once.  
During their exile, the Pandavas rescue Duryodhana who is captured during 
battle, to his great humiliation. Honor bids him swear to repay Arjuna one day. 
(During the war, Arjuna asks Duryodhana to surrender five arrows of Bhishma's 
meant to kill the Pandavas, and he does so, to keep his vow.) Duryodhana is so 
depressed after his rescue that he intends to kill himself. The Danavas (a family 
of demons) need him as their champion (he was born at their request) and appear 
before him. The demons promise they will possess his armies during the coming 
war, which will continue to give him false hope.  
One day, four of the Pandavas are killed by drinking the water from a poisonous 
lake. However Yudhishthira brings his brothers back to life by correctly 
answering the questions which Dharma, disguised as a crane, puts to him.  
The Thirteenth Year
According to the conditions of the game of dice, the thirteenth year which the 
Pandavas are to spend in disguise has now arrived. Yudhishthira (who presents 
himself as a poor brahmin), his brothers and Draupadi (who pass for wandering 
servants) all find refuge at the court of King Virata. Kicaka, a general in Virata's 
court becomes infatuated with Draupadi. He goes to great lengths to possess her, 
even threatening her life. Draupadi implores the mighty Bhima to help her; 
dressed in woman’s clothes, he goes in her stead to a secret rendezvous, and 
pulverizes the over-amorous general into a bloody mass of flesh.  
  
Meanwhile Duryodhana has launched an attack on Virata's kingdom. The king 
entrusts his troops to his young son who needs a chariot driver. Draupadi, who 
seeks war with the Kauravas at all costs, points out Arjuna as the world's best 
charioteer, despite the fact that he has disguised himself as a eunuch. Arjuna 
