As his brother is blind and 
unfit for the throne, Pandu 
becomes the new king of 
Hastinapura. One day while 
hunting in the forest, Pandu 
shoots a gazelle in the act of 
mating. The gazelle was 
actually a brahmin priest in 
disguise, who curses him 
saying that should Pandu 
make love to either of his two 
wives (Kunti and Madri), he 
will die instantly. Knowing he 
can never have children, 
Pandu resigns the throne, and 
goes to live with his wives in the mountains. Kunti, his first wife, informs him that 
she possesses a magic power. By reciting a secret formula, she can invoke a god 
at will and have a child by him. The mantra's power is put to the test, and three 
sons are born to her: Yudhishthira, the first-born, truthful and virtuous, son of the 
god Dharma; Bhima, the strongest of men, son of Vayu, god of the wind; and 
Arjuna, an irresistible warrior, son of Indra. Madri, Pandu's second wife, makes 
use of this power too. She gives birth to twin sons, Nakula and Sahadeva. Thanks 
to his two wives, Pandu now has five sons directly descended from the gods, the 
Pandavas, the heroes of the epic.  
Years later, Pandu one day surrenders to his passion for Madri. Fearing for his 
life, Madri tries to push him away but her struggles only inflame his desire more. 
Once they make love, Pandu falls dead, fulfilling the curse, and Madri, devoted to 
him always, joins him on the funeral pyre.  
Meanwhile, Dhritarashtra has become king, despite his blindness. He weds 
Gandhari in an arranged marriage. When she learns of her husband's infirmity, 
she decides to cover her eyes with a blindfold which she will never remove, to 
join him in his world of darkness. Then, after an abnormally long pregnancy of 
two years, she gives birth to a ball of flesh. Vyasa tells her to split up the ball into 
100 parts and put them in jars of ghee (Indian butter); in this way she becomes 
the mother of one hundred sons, the Kauravas.  
The first born is called Duryodhana. Sinister omens of violence greet his arrival 
into the world: jackals howl, strong winds blow, fires rage through the city. 
Dhritarashtra worries about what all this means. Vidura tells him that his first son 
brings hate and destruction into the world. He will one day destroy their race. 
Vidura urges the king to get rid of the child, but Dhritarashtra ignores his advice.  
Dhritarashtra is a weak ruler. He allows physical blindness to become a refusal to 
face reality and unwillingness to confront hard decisions, being easily led by 
