Duryodhana responds bravely: “I am now dying a glorious death. That end which 
is always sought by virtuous warriors is mine. Who is as fortunate as me? With 
all my brothers I will ascend to heaven, while you Pandavas will remain here, torn 
by grief and continuing to suffer.” (KD 816)  
As Duryodhana lies dying, Ashvatthama, Drona's son, tells him how he sneaked 
into the camp of the victorious Pandavas at night to perpetrate a hideous 
massacre, killing the remaining warriors and all the children while asleep, leaving 
the Pandavas without any heirs. Rather than welcoming the news, Duryodhana 
dies disheartened that the race of the Kurus appears to have no future.  
Thus all those on both sides die in the war, except the five Pandavas. When 
Yudhishthira learns of the massacre, he mourns: “We the conquerors have been 
conquered.”  
When the Pandavas seek revenge, Ashvatthama launches the most fearsome 
celestial weapon in his arsenal. Arjuna counters with his own weapon, which 
Drona taught both of them; it was only to be used against divine beings, or else it 
could destroy the world. Ashvatthama deflects his into the wombs of the 
remaining Pandava women, making them sterile, but Krishna promises that 
Arjuna will nonetheless have descendants. As punishment, Ashvatthama is 
cursed to wander the earth in exile for 3000 years.  
The Aftermath
Books 11-18 contain events following the war and teachings by Bhishma.  
  
After the war, when Krishna exits the chariot, it bursts into flames; only his 
presence kept the celestial weapons from destroying it earlier. Krishna reveals 
that the gods allowed this war to relieve Earth of her great burden (similar to 
Troy). Duryodhana was the incarnation of Kali, lord of the 4th age.  
Yudhishthira reports the death toll at six million. Appalled at such losses, he has 
a personal crisis similar to Arjuna before the battle. He doesn't want to rule 
because it requires the use of force and more violence. He sees that life itself is 
painful, as men are always searching for more material wealth and power, never 
satisfied. The man who prizes gold and dirt equally is happiest. The others 
convince him he must rule and fulfill his duty.  
