• 
“Actions performed under the direct guidance of the Supreme Lord or His 
representative are called akarma. This type of activity produces neither 
good nor bad reactions. Just as a soldier may kill under the command of 
his superior officer and not be held responsible for murder, though if he 
kills on his own accord he is liable for punishment, similarly, a Krishna-
conscious person acts under the Lord's direction and not for his own 
sake.” (BG as it is: online) 
• 
“Such a person takes no delight in sensual pleasures. He is ever satisfied 
within himself. No miseries can disturb him, nor any kind of material 
happiness. He is without attachment, fear and anger, and remains always 
aloof to the dualities of the world. … His mind is fixed upon the Supreme 
and he is always peaceful.” (KD 551) 
• 
There are two paths to liberation: 
renunciation (moksha) and 
performing one’s duty without desire. 
Since no one can truly renounce all 
action in life (this is a pretense of 
asceticism), it is better to work 
without attachment (KD 551). Some 
scholars think that the Bhagavad Gita 
was composed to combat a religious 
challenge from Jainism and 
Buddhism which arose in the 6th
• 
Krishna explains that the knowledge 
he imparts is ancient, just as he told 
it millions of years ago. Arjuna asks, 
“How can I accept this? It appears 
that you were born in this world only 
recently.” Krishna explains, birth too 
 
century BC, both teaching salvation 
through renouncing the world, the 
former by asceticism, the latter by 
monastic life (Kinsley 31). 
is an illusion, as men are born countless times. But in Krishna’s case, he 
comes into every age: “Whenever righteousness (dharma) becomes lax, O 
Arjuna, and injustice (adharma) arises, then I send myself forth to protect 
the good and bring evildoers to destruction. For the secure establishment 
of dharma, I come into being age after age. ... I was born to destroy the 
destroyers.” 
• 
Krishna then reveals his divine, universal nature to Arjuna in a magnificent 
vision of a multitude of gods, stretching out to infinity. Resolved now to 
perform his duty to his lord, Arjuna leads his troops into battle. 
