Duryodhana in later years. He continually blames fate, excusing his own inaction: 
"Irrevocable were all the things that have happened. Who could have stopped 
them? What then can I do? Destiny is surely all-powerful" [KD 69]. But one of 
Dhritarashtra's advisors tells him: "O king, surely a man who meets with calamity 
as a result of his own acts should not blame the gods, destiny, or others. Each of 
us receives the just results of our actions." [KD 538]  
Bhishma, now an old man, takes the responsibility of raising the two sets of 
cousins. They fight constantly, and even try to kill each other. One day a teacher 
and master of arms, Drona, appears and offers his services to train the boys. He 
has a secret mission: to avenge an insult made by a former friend. When young, 
Drona was close to Drupada, but years later, when Drona went to see his 
childhood companion, now a great king, he was scorned by Drupada because 
“only equals can be friends.” As payment for his training, Drona asks the 
Pandavas to avenge him. Being mighty warriors, they conquer Drupada's 
kingdom, and hand it over to Drona. He promptly gives his former friend half his 
kingdom back, saying “now we are equals.”  
Growing Rivalry between the Pandavas and the Kauravas 
• 
For revenge, Drupada has children by sorcery, born out of flames: son 
Dhrishtadyumna is fated to kill Drona; an oracle says daughter Draupadi 
will “bring destruction on an unrighteous ruler;” a third child Sikhandi is 
Amba reborn. 
• 
Later in the war, Drona and Bhishma will fight on the side of the Kauravas 
not so much out of loyalty but because their mortal enemies 
(Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandi) fight with the Pandavas. 
Drona recognizes Arjuna's superiority as a master of arms, especially the bow, 
and favors him with special training. In a contest of skill, he tells each of the 
Pandavas to strike a target, the eye of a wooden bird in a tree. He asks each one 
in turn, “O prince, tell me what you see.” One by one they respond, “I see my 
teacher, my brothers, the tree and the bird.” Drona tells them, “Then you will not 
hit the mark.” Arjuna, however, says he sees only the bird, and in fact, only the 
eye of the bird. Thus, focused on his target alone, he strikes with total accuracy. 
Drona rewards Arjuna by giving him a supreme weapon, the Brahmasira, only to 
be used against celestial beings, or else it will destroy the world.  
Drona stages a tournament to display all the Pandavas' skills, but a stranger 
appears who challenges Arjuna and equals him in archery. This is Karna, who the 
reader learns is Kunti's first son by Surya the sun god, whom she bore before she 
married Pandu and abandoned in a basket on the river (like Moses). Thus Karna 
is the older brother of the Pandavas. However, Karna does not know his real 
mother, being raised by a chariot driver. The Pandavas mock his lowly social 
status and will not fight with someone who is not of royal birth, but their cousin 
Duryodhana sees the chance to make an ally. Ignoring the strict rules of caste, he 
