of dharma due to greed, we ourselves should not forget dharma in the same 
way.” (KD 544-5)  
Arjuna fears that acting out his own dharma as warrior will conflict with universal 
dharma: how can killing family members be good, and not disrupt the social 
order? Herein lies an unresolved conflict in Hinduism between universal dharma 
and svadharma (an individual's duty according to caste and station in life). A 
warrior must kill to fulfill his duty, whereas a brahmin must avoid harming any 
living creature. Even demons have their own castes and svadharma, which may 
run counter to human morality. One person's dharma may be another's sin. This 
doctrine distinguishes Hindu thought from religions such as Judeo-Christianity 
and Islam which teach universal or absolute moral codes.  
His charioteer Krishna addresses him as they pause in the no-man's land 
between the two armies. This passage is the celebrated Bhagavad Gita, the guide 
to firm and resolute action.  
• 
Unlike many epic heroes, at this point Arjuna thinks before he acts. Arjuna 
hesitates before such killing, wanting to retreat from life and responsibility 
(tension between dharma and moksha), but Krishna tells him as a warrior 
it's his dharma to fight. The real conflict today is with the self on the 
“battlefield of the soul. 
• 
Don't worry about death, which is only one small step in the great and 
endless cycle of life. One neither kills or is killed. The soul merely casts off 
old bodies and enters new ones, just as a person changes garments. Death 
is only illusion (maya). 
• 
How does a warrior perform his duty without doing wrong, polluting 
himself with the blood of his enemies? The secret is detachment: do your 
duty without concern for the personal consequences. “Victory and defeat, 
pleasure and pain are all the same. Act, but don't reflect on the fruits of the 
act. Forget desire, seek detachment.” (play) 
• 
We must always do what is right without desiring success or fearing 
defeat. “Work without desire for the results, and thus without entangling 
yourself in karmic reactions.” (KD 550) Krishna tells Arjuna that good 
deeds will not get one to heaven if the desire for heaven is the sole 
motivation for good deeds. Desire is responsible for rebirth; if any desire 
remains when we die, we must return to another life. 
• 
Likewise, Yudhishthira told Draupadi during the exile that he performs 
dharma not for reward but because it is what a good person does; after the 
battle he has a similar crisis when he temporarily refuses to rule, 
despairing at all the carnage he has caused. 
