says, “Birth is obscure and men are like rivers whose origins are often unknown” 
(play). Duryodhana gives Karna a small kingdom, and Karna swears eternal 
friendship to the Kauravas.  
• 
Karna's lowly caste (social status) will haunt him throughout the epic; later 
at a contest for the hand of Draupadi, she rejects him outright because he 
is from a servant family. For a person who desires to be measured by his 
accomplishments, living under this shadow is unbearable. 
• 
As the child of the sun, Karna was born with golden armor over his skin. 
Later, the god Indra tricks Karna into giving this divine protection away. 
• 
After Karna was born, Kunti remained a virgin 
The Pandavas narrowly escape a plot by Duryodhana to burn them in a house 
made of highly flammable materials. For months afterward, they live in hiding in 
the forest. One night as Bhima keeps watch while the others sleep, there appears 
a rakshasa named Hidimbi (a man-eating ogre, one type of demon). Assuming the 
form of a beautiful woman, she falls madly in love with Bhima, who fights and 
kills her venomous brother. Bhima and the magical creature then have a powerful 
demon child called Ghatotkatcha; he swears to come to the aid of his father 
whenever necessary. 
Arjuna wins the hand of Draupadi
The Pandavas attend the swayamvara of Draupadi, a 
ceremony where she will pick her husband from a number of 
suitors. Arjuna wins the archery contest easily and Draupadi 
chooses him. When Arjuna announces to his mother that he 
has won the “prize,” Kunti tells him to share with his 
brothers, before seeing Draupadi. Like an irrevocable vow, 
her statement, even by mistake, can’t be undone, so all five 
brothers marry Draupadi, the daughter of Drupada.  
  
This unusual marriage fulfills karma, for in her former life, 
Draupadi had prayed to the god Shiva for a husband five 
times, and thus is rewarded for her devotion in this life.  
 
In the Mahabharata Shiva is not the “destroyer” of the later Puranas, but has 
more to do with blessings of fertility: he also granted Gandhari her 100 sons. 
The brothers agree to respect the privacy of each other when with Draupadi, but 
one day Arjuna enters the tent to retrieve his weapons and finds Yudhishthira and 
Draupadi in bed together. Even though Yudhishthira forgives him, Arjuna insists 
on keeping the vow. As penance, Arjuna goes into exile for a year; while away he 
marries three other wives, one Krishna’s sister, mostly for political alliances.  
