As the fight continues, the earth opens up and seizes Karna's chariot wheel, in 
fulfillment of a curse. In desperation, Karna tries to invoke his ultimate weapon, 
but the magic words escape him. He remembers Parasurama’s words: “When you 
life depends on your most powerful weapon, you will not be able to summon it.” 
In his last moments, Karna questions his beliefs: “Knowers of dharma have 
always said, ‘Dharma protects those devoted to dharma.’ But since my wheel 
sank today, I think dharma does not always protect” (CN 165).  
As he struggles to release his chariot, he cries out to Arjuna: “Do not strike an 
unarmed man. Wait until I can extract my wheel. You are a virtuous warrior. 
Remember the codes of war.” But Krishna taunts him: “Men in distress always 
call on virtue, forgetting their own evil deeds. Where was your virtue, O Karna, 
when Draupadi was brought weeping in the Kuru assembly? Where was it when 
Yudhishthira was robbed of his kingdom?” (KD 780) Karna’s head sinks to his 
chest, and he remains silent, while continuing to struggle with the chariot wheel. 
Krishna commands Arjuna to shoot, and Karna dies. A bright light rises out of 
Karna’s body and enters the sun. 
• 
Stubborn but loyal, Karna could have been king, as eldest of the Pandavas, 
but he remained with the Kauravas. He always fights fair, and keeps his 
promise to Kunti not to kill any brothers but Arjuna. Their rivalry echoes 
the mythic conflict between their divine fathers Indra and Surya.  
The Death of Duryodhana
Over the eighteen-day war, Duryodhana has seen his generals and their armies 
fall to the Pandavas, but to the very end he refuses to surrender. He hides in the 
waters of a lake, which he has solidified over him by magic. Ever the gambler, 
Yudhishthira tells Duryodhana that he can fight any brother he chooses, and if he 
wins, the kingdom will be his again. It says something of Duryodhana that he 
fights with Bhima rather than one of the weaker brothers. In a close battle 
between equals, Bhima wins only by treacherously striking Duryodhana on the 
legs, forbidden in the rules of war. Gandhari had put a protective spell over 
Duryodhana's body, but because he wore a loin cloth for modesty before his 
mother, his thighs were not protected.  
  
Duryodhana accuses Krishna of taking sides unfairly and encouraging Bhima’s 
treachery. Krishna responds: “Deceit in battle is acceptable against a deceitful 
foe. Even Indra used deceit to overcome the mighty asuras Virochana and Vritra.” 
An onlooker remarks, “Bhima has sacrificed dharma for the sake of material gain. 
This can never lead to success and happiness.” Krishna replies that Bhima was 
merely keeping his earlier vow, a sacred duty: “There is no unrighteousness in 
Bhima. He has carried out his promise and requited the debt he owed his enemy. 
Know that the terrible age of Kali is at hand, marked by fierce acts and the loss of 
dharma.” (KD 811-13)  
