cannot refuse to fight and is decisively victorious, one man against countless 
armies.  
War draws even closer. Duryodhana refuses to give his cousins back their 
kingdom because he claims they came out of hiding before the appointed time. 
He tries to win Krishna's support, as does Arjuna. Krishna offers Arjuna first 
choice: either he can have all of Krishna’s armies, or he can have Krishna alone. 
Arjuna chooses Krishna, allowing Duryodhana to have the armies. When Arjuna 
asks him to drive his chariot, Krishna accepts.  
In the Kaurava court, the blind king also senses the imminence of war. He asks 
the elderly Bhishma, an unparalleled warrior, to take the supreme command. His 
duty to the family outweighs his feelings toward the Pandavas, and he reluctantly 
accepts, but on one condition: that Karna does not fight. Although displeased, 
Karna bitterly agrees to fight only after Bhishma's death.  
Dhritarashtra sends an envoy to Yudhishthira and begs not to fight since he loves 
righteousness. It would be better to live without his kingdom than risk the lives of 
so many. Yudhishthira responds that each caste has its own duty, and his is to be 
a warrior/king, not a brahmin/beggar. However, even he has reservations: “War is 
evil in any form. To the dead, victory and defeat are the same” (CN 101).  
Krishna arrives as an emissary in a final attempt to safeguard peace. He speaks 
to Duryodhana who does not listen to him, but orders his guards to seize him. 
Krishna reveals his divine form: “Krishna laughed and as he did, his body 
suddenly flashed like lightning. He began to grow in size and various gods issued 
from him. Brahma sprang from his forehead and Shiva from his chest” (KD 492). 
Krishna allows even the blind Dhritarashtra to see his glory. Finally, he speaks to 
Karna, going so far as to reveal that he is the brother of those with whom he 
intends to fight. But Karna feels abandoned by his mother in his very first hours 
of life; furthermore he senses the end of this world. He will fight alongside the 
Kauravas, even though he can already foresee their defeat and his own death.  
Duryodhana will not listen to warnings. He convinces himself that since the gods 
had not blessed the Pandavas thus far, they would not protect them during the 
war. “I can sacrifice my life, my wealth, my kingdom, my everything, but I can 
never live in peace with the Pandavas. I will not surrender to them even as much 
land as can be pierced by the point of a needle” (KD 453). He makes excuses for 
his nature: “I am whatever the gods have made me” (KD 482). 
 
PART THREE: THE WAR  
Books 5-10 recount the 18-day war between the Pandavas and the Kauravas.  
