Drona positions the armies in a formation known only to him, the iron disc of war, 
which nobody knows how to break open, apart from Arjuna. If only Arjuna can be 
diverted away from the central battle, Drona promises victory. Arjuna has a 15-
year old son, Abhimanyu, who, by listening to his father while still in his mother's 
womb, has learned to force an entry into Drona's battle formation. As Arjuna is 
called to a diversionary battle far away, Yudhishthira entrusts Abhimanyu with 
the task of opening a breach in the disc. Abhimanyu succeeds, but when Bhima 
and Yudhishthira try to follow him into the opening, they are stopped by 
Jayadratha, a brother-in-law to the Kauravas, and the breach closes behind the 
young Abhimanyu. In spite of his bravery, he is killed.  
• 
Earlier during the time of exile, Jayadratha had tried to kidnap Draupadi, 
thus another reason for the Pandavas to hate him. 
At this point Arjuna returns to the camp. Inflamed with rage and grief at the sight 
of his son's body, he vows to kill Jayadratha before sunset on the following day. 
He solemnly swears to throw himself into the sacrificial fire, should he fail. Even 
Krishna is alarmed by this terrible oath. On the next day, Jayadratha is heavily 
guarded, and Arjuna is unable to reach him. Krishna causes a momentary eclipse 
of the sun, convincing the enemy that, since night has come, Arjuna must have 
killed himself because he hasn't kept his vow. Rejoicing, they lay down their 
arms, leaving Jayadratha vulnerable to Arjuna's arrow.  
Jayadratha's father had pronounced a curse on anyone who killed his son, saying 
that whoever caused his son's head to fall to the ground would die. Using magical 
mantras, Arjuna causes his arrow not only to sever Jayadratha's head, but to 
carry it miles away to fall into his father's lap. Being in prayer, he doesn't realize 
what's happened; he stands up and the head falls, thus he dies from his own 
curse.  
The following day, Karna hurls himself into the battle. Kunti tries to persuade him 
to join the Pandavas, but Karna is inflexible. However, he does promise Kunti that 
he will only kill Arjuna, for one of them must die. In this way, she will still have 
five sons after the war.  
Karna possesses a magic lance, the gift of Indra, which will kill any living being 
but can be used only once. He keeps it in reserve for Arjuna. To dispose of this 
lance, Krishna calls upon Ghatotkatcha, son of Bhima and the rakshasa. During 
the night, he fights an epic battle against Karna, who can destroy the demon only 
by resorting to his magic lance. Ghatotkatcha is killed, but Krishna dances for 
joy. With his lance now expended, Karna is vulnerable and Arjuna can kill him.  
Drona continues to challenge the Pandava armies, slaying thousands. But the 
Pandavas know his weakness: the love of his only son Ashvatthama. Bhima slays 
an elephant, also called Ashvatthama, then deceitfully tells Drona of the death of 
his son. Suspecting a lie, Drona asks Yudhishthira for the truth: is his son dead 
