war Duryodhana suggests capturing Yudhishthira and playing another 
game, which Drona calls stupid.)  
• 
Duryodhana always threatens to commit suicide when things don’t go his 
way (almost comical): “Excessive self-centeredness leads to unrealistic 
demands and unreasonable expectations from life” (Chaitanya 67).  
• 
Kunti: “Duryodhana is a blind man’s son, living blindly.” (play) 
Both Dhritarashtra and Yudhishthira ignore Vidura’s warning to avoid the game, 
leaving the results to “supreme and unavoidable” fate. Krishna warns Bhishma 
not to interfere with the dice game: “If your race must be destroyed to save 
dharma, would you allow it?” (play) Told by his father that a warrior’s dharma is 
to fight honorably, not to win at all costs, Duryodhana says,  “The way of the 
warrior is fixed on victory, whether there’s dharma or adharma on his way.”  
Carried away by the intoxication of the game, Yudhishthira wagers and loses all 
that he possesses: his lands, his kingdom, his brothers, even himself, and 
eventually Draupadi, who is dragged before the company by her hair, a special 
insult since a married woman’s hair was sacred.  
She challenges the Kauravas with a question: 
how can someone who has lost himself wager 
someone else in a game, but no one can 
answer her. Even Bhishma is confounded: 
“The ways of dharma are subtle.” When even 
the wise Bhishma cannot resolve the 
question, she says, “I think time is out of 
joint. The ancient eternal dharma is lost 
among the Kauravas.” Instead, they insult 
her, displaying her during the time of her 
period. Karna, still stinging from his rejection 
at the swayamvara, calls her a harlot who 
services five men. Duryodhana seeks to 
entice her by uncovering his thigh (obscene 
in that culture). Enraged at this treatment of 
his wife, Bhima vows that he will one day 
drink Duhsasana’s blood and break 
Duryodhana’s thigh.  
Draupadi is about to be stripped naked when 
she invokes Krishna, who comes to her rescue and creates an endless supply of 
cloth around her. She swears that one day she will be avenged. There will be a 
great war, a war without mercy. At her curse a jackal howls. Frightened, 
Dhritarashtra apologizes to her and gives her husbands' back everything they 
lost, but Draupadi asks nothing for herself, saying, “Greed devours all beings and 
is dharma's [righteousness] ruin. I refuse greed.” (CN 55)  
