In our last video, we reviewed the
basic math of stochastic gradient
descent, or SGD.
We know that to update a model, we need
to find a gradient, the slope of the
loss, but in a distributed system, that
slope isn't calculated in one place,
it's calculated in pieces across the
entire cluster.
Let's look at the life cycle of a
single training alteration, often
called a step, as shown in the
mechanics. Step one is the local
calculation. Each worker node in your
cluster takes its own specific mini
batch of data. Using the current
version of the model, the worker
performs a forward and backward pass to
compute the local gradient. This
represents the best guess of how to
improve the model based only on the
data specific to that worker saw. Step
2 is the push. Once those local
gradients are ready. They need to be
shared, you see the workers sending
these gradients up to the parameter
server actors. In other architectures,
workers might exchange them directly
using a method called alluce. Either
way, the goal is the same move the
local data to the central or a
collective point. Step 3 is a global
update. This is where the magic happens.
The system takes all those different
local gradients from the workers and
averages them. This average represents
a much more accurate global direction
for the model to move in.
The central parameter server uses this
average to update the master copy of
the model weights. Step 4 is the pull.
Now that the master model has been
updated, the individual workers have
stale or old versions of the weights.
The updated weights are broadcast or
pulled back down to every worker in the
cluster. Once every worker has a new
set of identical weights, the cycle is
complete. They are now ready to grab a
new batch of data and start the next
iteration. This constant push, update,
pull cycle is what allows a distributed
system to behave like one giant
computer. However, as we discussed
earlier in the module, this cycle is
only as fast as your network. If the
push and pull takes too long, your
workers spend more time waiting than
they do calculating.
This 4 step process is the standard way
we distribute SGD, but there's a big
question we haven't answered it yet. Do
we make the workers wait for each other
at the end of every step in our next
lesson, we'll look at the aggregation
strategies and compare synchronous
versus asynchronous training. I'll see
you there.
