Welcome back, learners, to this last
module of your course, the Capstone
Project.
I'm sure you're going to really enjoy
this one, and I hope you're excited.
In this project, we will build a LLM
based application called Quiz Genius AI.
So let's get started.
Welcome to the final module of your
course, the Capstone project. In this
project, we will build an LLM
application called Quiz Genius AI. I
have named it so you can name it
whatever you want.
Let's go ahead
Let me now introduce this project to
you, right?
So in this hands-on project, we will
implement a quiz generation app, hence
the name Quiz Genius AI, right? And
this app will be built with a large
language model from the Gemini API.
My main motive with this project is to
inspire you and motivate you to
implement your own project ideas with
LLMs. Take the template that I will
share with you in this module and
implement your own ideas with it, right?
Great. Now let me share some key
features of this application. The first
one being dynamic quiz generation. This
application will create a 3 question
MCQ on any topic that the user will
specify. Who is the user? You and I,
right?
Now, difficulty level, I've set it to
intermediate, so the MCQs will be at an
intermediate difficulty level, which
will ensure that the questions are
challenging yet accessible, right, to
make things interesting.
Now a main one, structured JSON output.
The model will return quiz data in a
consistent, easy to parse JSON format,
and this specific skill is high in
demand because in industrial level
applications you need consistent and
structured output from LLMs.
Then interactive UI, the UI or this
application will allow users to answer
questions and provide and the
application will provide immediate
feedback. So this will happen
dynamically in real time, and you will
see this in the demo, right?
Finally, API key management. Again, a
very high sought after skill, so that
you have the security in place. So we
will securely securely handle API keys
using the collapse user data feature,
right?
Finally, this project serves as a
practical example of how generative AI
can be integrated into interactive
applications and create engaging and
educational experiences, right? So this
project is from the domain of education.
You can implement the same template in
any domain of your choice, and I highly
encourage you to do that. All right. So
we've introduced the project to you. I
hope you're excited, and I'll see you
in the next video where we will start
implementing it. Thank you.
I hope you're excited, and I'll see you
in the next video. Thank you.
