Welcome back, learners. In this lesson
so far, we have learned about POS
tagging. We have implemented it with
Spacey and NLTK. Now let's look at a
new library and rather unexplored and
unpopular library, but very, very
powerful library called Flair, right?
So Flair is an NLP framework. Written
in Pytosh, right, so these are neural
network models, pre-trained models that
do different things like POS tagging.
N, etc. etc. right? So more on Flare
later. Let's first implement POS
tagging with Flare, and later in this
module we will discuss what Flare is
and how does it compare with the other
NLP libraries, right? So let's begin.
We will begin with installation.
While the library instals, let's import.
From flare.data import sentence. So
sentence is the main text-free
processing pipeline and the from.
Flair.models.
Import
Sequence tagger, right? So we will do
reprocessing here and we will import
the model and implement this for POS
tagging, right? So now let's load the
POS tagger.
Let's call it tiger. And sequence.
Sequence tagger. load.
POS for pos.
Now, let's We
Text data. So let's call it sentence.
Sentence equals sentence, and my text
would be something like anything that
you write. You can test it on any
random sentence. So flair is a great.
Library for natural language.
Processing, you must.
Check it out, right?
OK, now I will pass text here. So this
will do all the text the processing for
me. Solid tokenization and all of that
will happen here.
Then let's Do the predictions.
Sour predict sentence.
Right? And now let's print it. So
sentence.2 tag string.
Perfect. I hope this runs without any
errors. OK, perfect. So, the text is uh
oh OK. I passed it as a string.
Let's rerun it or let's run this in a
separate cell so that these two things
don't mix up.
Right, so Flair is a great library for
natural language processing. You must
check it out. This was the sentence,
right? And here are the tags. Flair is
NNP, which is noun, is, is VBZ, which
is verb. A is a determiner, very
similar to the tags we saw in the last
video, right? Tags from NLTK, right?
Great. So this is exactly how you
implement POS tagging with the Flair
Natural Language Processing library.
Very simple. Just load the model, right,
and do some preprocessing and pass the
preprocessed text to the model, right?
Now I also have a library of these tags
for you. Let me share it with you here.
Right? So, anything that you need to
find a definition for any of the tags,
you can find it here, and the source is
here, it's available on hugging face,
right?
So, you can check it out as well.
Great So this is They, they're passing
pause English, right, which is the same
as pause. So there is flair pause
tagging in German language in some
other languages as well. So, Great.
This was all about implementing POS
tagging with Flair Natural Language
Library. What I would expect for you to
do is implement this on your own data
sets, right? Firstly, that, and then
also compare the results. From each of
the three libraries that we have seen
so far, right? Take the same text data,
implement all three, and then compare
the results, right? If you would ask me
what is my preference for POS tagging,
my first preference would be Spacey
that we saw in detail in previous
videos, right? Post that, it would
totally depend on the problem and the
use case, right? So that's my two cents
on which library is better or not so
better, right? So, there you go. This
was it for this lesson. I hope you've
enjoyed this and I'll see you in the
next video. Thank you.
