All right, learners, let's get started
with package installation and the API
setup. All right, learners, I hope
you're excited to get started. In this
video, we will set up our project so
that we can implement it easily in the
following videos, right? So let's get
started.
So let's begin with package
installation and the API setup, right?
So first, let's install Google GEI
library. So we will run a PI install.
Great. Now let's run some imports. So
import Jason for the output, Google,
from Google, we will import Gen AI to
handle the LLM application.
Again, from Gen AI we will import types,
and I will show you the implementation
in the project, right? Finally, some
rejects, right, so let's run this.
Great. Now what I'll do is I will call
the API key. Well, just to run the app,
you can directly paste your API key
here, right? Let me paste this here so
that it makes much more sense to you.
Yeah, so you can directly paste your
API key here. However, highly not
recommended for industrial applications
because your API keys need to be secure,
right? So what we will do, we will copy
your API key. And we will paste it here
and we will define the variable name as
Gemini API key. So what userdata.get
will do is it will fetch this API key
and store it in this variable, right? I
hope that makes sense.
Once we have our API key handy, we will
define the client. What is client,
GNAI.client, and we will pass the API
key. This client will let us run the
LLM model, right?
Let's also define the model name Gemini
2.5 flashlight. Again, this is a
lighter version of the Gemini 2.5 model.
This is lighter in applications of
faster and also more cost effective,
great for demo purposes and POCs.
Again, in some applications, you can
also define the model name as part of
your hidden data.
Let's run this again, just to make sure.
Great, so our setup is done. Great. I
will see you in the next video where we
will set up our prompt template for the
application. Thank you. All right, I'll
see you in the next video. Thank you.
