First, let's try to understand what is
marketing. In this lesson, we will take
a deep dive to understand the most
quintessential concepts in marketing
starting from what exactly marketing is.
If you've ever wondered how a small
group of people in a meeting room
decide what communication, what
messages should be communicated in the
world, that could be resonated with the
population at large. And as a result,
what makes their ideas, activities, and
campaigns so compelling that people
actually capture their attention into
it, that helps solves problems at the
society or at an individual level and
influence an individual decisions.
That's what marketing is all about.
Marketing is all about understanding
people's challenges, needs, and desires.
It's all about delivering messages and
communications and solutions that
resonate with them. The formal
definition of marketing says marketing
is a set of strategies and activities
that companies or brands use to acquire
customers, engage them, and build
strong relationships while creating a
final consumer value. But if you ever
forget the formal definition of
marketing, here's a one liner that you
could remember. Marketing is all about
managing the perception and creating
value. Even better, if you forget both
of the definitions, just remember
marketing is all about providing value
to the final consumers. So as we were
talking about, marketing is all about
providing value to customers, whether
it's offering through a solution to the
problem that an individual is facing or
Helping saving time, or simply
fostering a connection, marketing
bridges the gap between companies, what
companies offer and what consumers need.
Ultimately, the key to successful
marketing is building trust and
fostering strong consumer relationships.
It's an ongoing process. Not just to a
one-time event, but the companies that
excel is that they create a continuous
loop of loyalty and drive long-term
success. Now we have understood what
marketing is. In the next video we'll
take a closer look at the elements that
make up a successful marketing
strategist and how companies and
businesses use the strategies to drive
growth.
