Hi again. In this video we're going to
take a deep dive in one of the most
crucial concepts in marketing, that is
value. Understanding how value is
perceived by consumers is key to
creating products and services that
truly resonate with them. By the end of
this video, you will understand how to
balance between benefits and costs that
impacts consumer satisfaction and
loyalty. So what is value? Let's start
by breaking down what do we mean by
value. At core, its value is defined by
a simple equation. Value is just a
relationship between benefit and cost.
This equation provides us a foundation
for how consumers evaluate the worth of
a product or a service. When consumers
are making a purchase decisions, they
weigh the benefits they will get from
the product against the costs that they
have to pay. If the benefits outweigh
the cost, the perceived value is high.
If the cost exceeds the benefit, the
perceived value drops. So as you can
see, it's a fine balance how companies
and brands try to walk away with
benefits and the costs that they have
to incur. So value is nothing but
benefit divided by cost, and your
benefit should always be higher than
the cost that your consumers are
incurring. Now explore this a bit
further. Imagine you're thinking about
buying a new smartwatch. The benefit
includes features like fitness tracking,
long battery life, and sleek design.
The cost is of course the price that
you have to pay for it. The benefits
significantly outweigh the cost. You
will feel the value is high. You might
say this is a great deal, or I love
this brand. When consumers feel like
they're getting a lot of benefit for
the price that they are paying, it
creates positive feelings about the
product and the brand. As a brand or as
a company, marketeers always try to
provide higher value or higher benefit
as compared to the cost that consumers
are thinking about. However, If the
benefits don't justify the price, the
consumers feel the product doesn't live
up to its cost. The value will be less
than a numerical value of one, because
remember, the value equation benefit
divided by the cost, it should always
be greater than one. Whenever the value
drops less than one, it's considered as
a low value. In this case, consumers
might feel like they have been ripped
off, saying things like, you know, I
overpaid for this. This kind of
perception can lead to a
dissatisfaction or loss of consumer
loyalty. Now moving to another value
ecosystem which is known as fair value.
What happens when the value ratio is
exactly one, basically when your
benefit equals to the cost. This means
the consumer feels the product service
is fairly valued or they have a fair
value. They got exactly what they paid
for, but there is no extra excitement
or connection. The consumer might think
it's worth exactly what I have paid for,
but they won't feel significantly
strong enough or be loyal to the brand
or the company. For marketeer, this
highlights the importance of. Perceived
value because it's not just about the
price, it's about the experience and
the benefits consumers gain from it. So
the question is how to increase value.
To increase value, businesses can
either increase the benefits that they
offer like adding features, improving
quality, reduce the cost to consumer,
or offering better customer service,
for example, by offering discounts or
streamlining the purchase process. So
what we learned how to add more value.
Either they can add more features to
their products or services, they can
reduce the cost, or they can improve
the quality, or maybe they can offer
better customer service for long term
loyalty. Ultimately, the goal is to
make sure that the perceived value is
always high because that leads to
consumer satisfaction, associated
loyalty, and positive word of mouth. A
company that provides exceptional value
will earn long term loyalty, which is
essential for sustained business
success.
With this, in our next video, we'll
take a deeper dive on how marketers
ensure they're offering highest value
to their consumers.
