Hi again. In this video we are going to
explore the different types of value
from a consumer perspective. Broadly,
there are two kinds of values. One is
intangible and tangible. Understanding
the various ways the value is perceived
help marketeers tailor their strength
to meet customer needs and expectations.
We'll understand what this intangible
values means and what tangible values
means and how we can use it on a
strength. Let's first start with
tangible values. These are objectives,
measurable and logical values. Tangible
values focus on creating concrete
benefits that are easy to quantify.
Within tangible values, there are two
broad categories of value that can be
defined. The first type is economic
value, which primarily focuses on price
and efficiency. This is where consumers
seek products that offer them the best
deal for their money. For example,
buying a bulk of packets of coffee
allows a consumer to save 20% on the
price. This is considered as an
economic value because there is an
economic opportunity associated to it.
Another example, consider a car with a
fuel efficiency of 25 kilometres per
litre. Consumers see a real value
because they can save money on their
gasoline or petrol prices. The second
type of tangible value is a functional
value. This refers to the utility or
the performance that a product provides.
It's all about how a product does what
it's supposed to do. For example, a
smartphone with a 48 hour battery life
offers functional value because it
provides long lasting. Use without the
need of constant recharge. Convenience
can also be a part of functional value.
Think of an app that allows you to
order groceries in just 10 minutes.
It's all about the speed and the ease
of use for major contributors and to
its value. Now we have understood what
tangible values are and what are the
various kinds of tangible values. Now
let's move to intangible values. These
are more subjective, emotional, and
psychological. These values are
fundamentally harder to quantify but
can be just as important, not more so,
in a customer's decision making process.
The first type of intangible value is
social value, which is related to how a
product affects the consumer's status
or relationship with others. For
example, owning a Rolex watch could
signal success and elevates one's
status. Some people buy products to
feel a sense of belonging, like
purchasing a specific brand or sneakers,
because everyone in the group wears
them. Other consumers are driven by
identity, such as buying eco-friendly
products to show them how responsible
citizens they are concerned about the
environment.
The second type of intangible value is
experiential value. This refers to the
sensory and emotional satisfaction that
a consumer gains from using a product
or a service. For instance, the
aesthetics of an Apple store or the
sleek dashboard of a luxury car can
provide an experience that goes beyond
the functional items of it. Or another
example could be an exceptional
customer service that makes you feel
pampered. Maybe, for example, at a
high-end hotel, the receptionist greets
you with a smile that creates an
emotional connection that adds value to
the experience. Psychological ease
could also be a factor, for example,
having a peace of mind that comes with
no questions asked, return, or a refund
policy that makes a huge difference in
consumer preferences and choices.
Another example could be whenever you
go to Starbucks, you're not just having
a coffee, but you have the smell of the
coffee aroma, the music, the ambience,
and how politely the barista greets you.
Now let's talk about the value equation
because we have so far understood what
are the two kinds of values and within
that what are the subcategories of
values. But value equation is a very
important thing that helps us
understand how different types of value
play a role in shaping consumer
thoughts. For example, an economic
value. Consumers ask, Is this a good
investment? For a functional value, the
question is, does this do what I need
to do? For social consumers, they
wonder, What will people think of me if
I use this. Finally, with the
experiential value, consumers ask, How
do I feel while using this? So this
value equation helps you understand
what are the primary and subconscious
motivations of a consumer before they
consider a particular product or brand
or a company. Remember back then we
talked about the value equation where
we said the benefits should always
outweigh the costs. How to increase the
benefit or increase the numerator in
that equation? Let's take an example of
Starbucks. You pay ₹300 for 50 or maybe
₹100 worth of coffee beans, but the
benefits that include a comfortable
seating, a Wi Fi, a status symbol which
is a cup, and the brand logo instilled
on it, that social benefit actually
outweighs the cost that a consumer
incurs. We talked about the value
equation. Remember, benefits divided by
the cost. In the last example we talked
about how we can increase benefits. Now
in this particular example, we'll try
to look at how we can decrease cost so
that our overall value also increases.
Let's take an example of Amazon.
Amazon's website has an easy option
which helps you buy. It's called a
single click buy now button. By
removing the mental energy and the time
that it takes to fill up a form, Amazon
actually lowers the perceived cost,
making the value ratio look much better
instantly. So far we have explored the
different types of value. It's clear
how important value is in shaping
consumer decisions, but how does demand
fit into the picture? In the next video,
we will shift our focus to demand.
Understand how it drives consumer
behaviour and what factors influence
the demand for products and services.
Thank you and I will see you in the
next video.
