Hi. Welcome back. In this video we are
going to explore the concept of demand,
a fundamental principle in economics
that drives consumer behaviour.
Understanding demand is essential for
marketeers because it helps them. To
know what consumers want and how much
they are willing to pay for it. So what
is a demand? In simple terms, demand is
the relationship between consumers'
desires to purchase a good or a service
and their willingness and also their
ability to pay for them. So there are
three key factors we are talking about
here. First, need, ability to pay, and
willingness. Let's understand this
triage in a little more deep dive
fashion. First we will talk about need.
What is a need? Need refers to the
basic requirements or desires that
drive consumers' purchasing decisions.
These are essential items that people
need to live or to function. It's the
basic things that a human being needs,
for example, food, clothing, or shelter.
With that, we will move to the second
part of the triage, which is the
ability. It refers to the consumer's
financial capacity to. Make a purchase.
Even if someone desires a product, they
need to have the resources to buy it.
That defines the ability. Finally, we
will talk about the willingness.
Willingness is the consumer's choice or
the readiness to make a purchase at a
certain price. It's not just about
having the ability to buy something
that the consumer must also feel that
the price is right and the product or
service offers the right value at the
right price for them. When all these 3
factors are in place, when a consumer
has a need, the ability to pay, and the
willingness to make a purchase, that's
when demand is created. For example, a
person may have a need for a smartphone,
the ability to afford it, and the
willingness to pay a certain price that
comes with it. In the next video, we'll
take a deep dive to understand the
difference between demand and want, and
explore how marketers can use this
understanding to create more effective
marketing strategies.
