In this video we are going to take a
deep dive to understand the difference
between need, want, and demand. They
might sound a little associated with
each of those things, but trust me,
they are all very different, and how
these concepts can play a crucial role
in shaping consumer behaviour.
Understanding these differences is. For
marketeers because it helps them to
tailor strategies that address both the
basic requirements of consumers as well
as their desires. Let's start by
discussing need. Need, as we all
learned in the previous video, is the
fundamental thing that a human being
might require to survive and to
function. They are essential to human
life and they don't change over time.
Think about things like air, water,
food, shelter, and sleep. These are all
the needs that are constant and
universal for every human being. As
marketeers, we don't create needs. We
simply cater to them by providing
products or services that fulfil these
essential requirements. For instance,
we all need food, but different brands
and provides different various options
for how that need is met, like fast
food chains or home delivery services.
That's where marketeers play a role.
Now moving to the second concept which
is want. While needs are Constant wants
change time over time. They can vary
based on various factors like trends,
age, or culture, wants or desires for
specific products or services that are
not essential for survival but enhance
a person's quality of life. Unlike
needs, wants are shaped by external
influences such as advertisements, peer
pressure, or even personal preferences.
For example, a person may need food,
but they might want a specific type of
cuisine, like a sushi or a high-end
meal at a restaurant. Similarly,
someone might need just a white
flatbread or someone might need a brown
bread or someone might need a
multi-grain bread. Similarly, someone
may need clothing, but they want the
latest fashion trends like buying the
latest Nike sneakers or someone might
need some other brand sneakers.
Remember, as marketeers we play a
significant role in creating wants.
While we can't create needs, we can
certainly influence what people want by
positioning products in a way that
resonates with consumers' desires,
emotions, and lifestyle choices. This
is where branding and marketing comes
into play. We'll talk about branding in
the next few sessions as we progress
through. But for now, do remember,
through strategic advertisements,
promotions and messaging, marketeers
can persuade consumers that a
particular product or service can
satisfy a specific want. Next we have
demand. Demand is very different from
needs and wants because it reflects the
consumer's ability and willingness to
pay, as we have just learned. Simply
put, demand is the combination of need
or want with the ability to purchase.
Even if someone has a strong desire for
a product, they may need to have the
financial resources and financial means
to purchase it. For example, a person
might want the latest iPhone, but if
they don't have the money to afford it,
that desire doesn't translate into
demand. On the other hand, when the
person has the ability to pay, the
desire transforms into demand. So this
is a quick snapshot that you can look
in front of your screen where we kind
of divide and understand the features
that segregates needs, wants, and
demand. Taking another deep dive into
demand. Demand is very crucial for
businesses because it directly impacts
sales. Marketeers need to understand
that not just because a consumer wants
a product, it doesn't necessarily mean
that they will buy it. The purchase
decision depends on various factors.
Some prominent factors include the
income level that they are operating in,
the pricing of the product, and
remember the value that we talked about.
The perceived value also plays a major
role over here. For example, if an
iPhone is priced too high for a
particular market, even if many people
want it, the demand might be limited
due to affordability issues. In summary,
need, want, and demand are interrelated
but distinct concepts. Remember, needs
are basic and unchanging, while wants
are more flexible and influenced by
external factors. And how is the result
of both need or want combined with the
ability and willingness to pay for a
particular product or service.
Understanding these differences helps
marketeers create effective strategies
that align with consumer behaviour and
purchasing power. With this, we have so
far understood the various conceptual
differences between need, want, and
demand. In the next video, we'll shift
our focus to economics and explore
various economic principles and how
marketeers use these economic
principles to influence the marketing
strategies and understand consumer
behaviour better.
