In our last lesson,
We talked about the price of scaling
out. We realised that when we split our
data across a cluster, we're no longer
dealing with a single perfect machine.
Instead, we're dealing with a web of
computers connected by a network. Today
we're going to look at why many big
data projects fail before they even
start. It's because of a list of myths
known as the fallacies of distributed
computing.
These are common sense things that
developers assume are true, but in the
world of distributed systems, they are
dangerous lies. Fallacy number one. The
network is reliable. The biggest
mistake we make is assuming the network
is reliable. On our laptop, when you
save a file to your hard drive, it
works 99.999% of the time. But in a
cluster, a message has to go through
wires, routers and switches. Think
about a busy city during a rainstorm.
Roads get flooded, traffic lights fail,
suddenly your delivery truck can't get
to the destination. In a data centre,
cables can be accidentally unplugged,
or a switch can overheat. If your code
assumes the message always arrives,
your system will crash the moment there
is a tiny glitch. You must design your
system to expect that the message will
be lost. Fallacy number 2 and 3,
latency and bandwidth.
Next are the twins of performance.
Latency is 0 and the bandwidth is
infinite. On a single computer. Moving
data from memory to CPU is nearly
instantaneous, but in a cluster,
sending a request to another nodes
takes time. This is latency It's a
difference between asking someone in
the same room for a pen versus sending
a letter across the country to ask for
one. If the letter travels fast, the
round trip takes time. Bandwidth is
about how much data you can fit through
a pipe at once.
Many people think we have fibre optics,
so bandwidth is infinite. But imagine a
giant water pipe. No matter how big it
is, if you try to push the entire ocean
through it at once, it'll burst. In big
data, if you try to move a petabyte of
data across the network for a simple
calculation. You will clog the system.
This is why we learned about data
locality in Module I, because bandwidth
is precious.
The other fallacies involve assuming
the network is secure. That the
topology doesn't change, that there is
only one administrator. In reality,
networks are messy and constantly being
hacked, servers are added and removed
daily. The topology changes. Different
teams manage different parts of the
network.
Meaning, no one person has the master
key, assuming things are simple and
clean led to systems that are fragile
and impossible to fix.
When things inevitably go wrong. So
what is the key takeaway for this? To
be a successful big data architect, you
have to be a bit of a pessimist. You
have to assume the network will fail.
The latency will be high, and the
bandwidth will be limited. In our next
video, we'll look at how we build
systems that survive these fallacies by
defining partition tolerance. We'll
learn how to keep the system running
even when the roads between our servers
are completely blocked. I'll see you
there. Thank you so much.
