Consumer behavior explains why people buy. But how do companies influence those decisions? The answer lies in branding. Let's now understand what a brand really means. When we think about a brand, we often think a brand is just a color, symbol or logo. But brand is not just these. These are just brand communication assets. A brand is all about a perception people have in their minds. It's just how people think and feel about a product or company. Just like a child, you can influence a brand but you cannot completely control how people perceive it. So how this perception is built? A brand image is built through a collection of small experiences. A brand can be defined as a name, term, sign, symbol, design or combination of them intended to identify the goods and services of one seller and differentiate them from competitors. It's also a seller's promise to deliver a specific set of features, benefits and service consistently to buyers.
But a brand means much more than just identification. So how does a brand communicates its value? A brand communicates six levels of meaning. Attributes, benefits, values, culture, personality, and user. Let's now briefly understand what each level means. These levels define what the brand truly represents in the minds of consumers. First talking about attributes. Attributes may include technological or superiority or ease of use. Second is benefits. Benefits may relate to social, experiential or self-esteem level needs. Third is values. They reflect how the brand helps in solving customer problems. Fourth is culture. It represents the community or mindset associated with the brand such as Apple community who thinks different. Fifth is personality. It defines the type of people which the brand represents such as rebels or those who want to make a difference. Finally, users. It refers to the target segments and loyal customers associated with the brand.
Now that we understand what a brand means, let's look at the role brands play. Let's examine the major roles brand play. Brands identify the source or maker of a product and allow consumers, either individuals or organizations, to assign responsibility for its performance to a particular manufacturer or distributor. Consumers may evaluate ethical products differently depending on how they are branded. They learn about brands through past experiences with the product and its marketing program. Finding out which brands satisfy their needs and which do not. As consumers lives become more complicated, rushed, time starved, a brand's ability to simplify decision-m and reduce risk becomes invaluable. Brands also perform valuable functions for firms. First, they simplify product handling or tracing. Brands help organize inventory and accounting records. Brands also offer the firm legal protection for unique features or aspects of the product.
The brand name can be protected through registered trademarks. Manufacturing process can be protected through patents and packaging can be protected through copyright and proprietary designs. This intellectual property rights ensure that the firm can safely invest in a brand and reap the benefits of a valuable asset. A credible brand signals in a certain level of quality so satisfied buyers can easily choose that product again. Brand loyalty also provides predictability and security of demand for the firm and it creates barriers to entry that make it difficult for other firms to enter the market. Loyalty also translates to consumer willingness to pay a higher price often are 20 25% higher than the competing brands. But the question is how do brands exp express themselves in the market. A brand asset refers to elements like color, symbol, shape or slogan. A brand vehicle is how brand is expressed physically or experientially in the market.
For example, Coca-Cola's iconic glass bottle shape is a brand asset while a 3D billboard in Time Square acts as a brand vehicle. UPS uses its Pullman brown color as an asset while its delivery trucks serves as a vehicles. Mastercards Interlocking red and orange circles are assets while the physical plastic card is the vehicle. Red Bull gives you wings slogan is an asset and sponsoring a man jumping from space is a brand vehicle. Together assets and vehicle help communicate and strengthen a brand perception.
