Hi again. In this video, let's explore some psychological principles that influence consumer purchase decision. Daniel Canningham, who has written the book Thinking Fast and Slow, he talks about our brain has two systems, system one and system two. Now, let's understand these two systems by answering this following question. Imagine this question. A bat and a ball cost together a dollar and a 10 cents. And we would say the bat cost $1 more than the ball. So how much exactly does the ball cost? Many people immediately would answer 10 cents because it's a differential of 10 cents that they immediately calculate. But if the ball cost 10, then the bat would cost $110 making a total at 1.2. But the correct answer is the ball cost 5 cents and the bat cost $15. So let's understand this two different systems of thinking. System one is more intuitive, instinctive and automatic. It's fast, automatic, and unconscious relying on associations and for exudments.
In fact, it accounts for 95% of our thinking. Whereas on the other hand, system two, it's slow, analytical, It requires effort, logic, and deliberate thinking. Because it takes more mental energy, it's often lazy or easily fatigued and accounts for only 5% of our thinking. So how can marketeers help consumer make faster decisions? One of the ways is by encouraging system one thinking. Marketers can increase or create time pressure which encourage quicker decisions. They can also deplete system two which is more like the logical or the slow or the analytical part of the brain. For example, by presenting choices when people are mentally tired, like offering a cookie at 8:00 p.m. instead of 8:00 a.m. Another approach is increasing cognitive load, such as multitasking situations where people rely on instinct. Another powerful tactic marketeers use is reducing the paradox of choice. When consumers are given too many choices, it can actually reduce the likelihood of making a purchase.
One famous experiment involving a jam, it talks about when 20 four varieties of jam were displayed. Only 60% shoppers stopped to look at but only 3% actually brought a jar. When this varieties of jam was reduced from 24 to six varieties of jam, 40% shoppers stopped and 30% made a purchase. In this case, a fewer choices led to higher sales. So this is known as the paradox of choice. Next, let's look at another psychological effect called anchoring. Consider these two prices of same identical items. Price A is stacked at $500. Whereas on the other item, which is very similar and identical to the other one, it is marked at,000, but now strike off and reduced to $500. Even though the final price is same, price B feels like a better deal because the original price acts as an anchor and we feel like we are getting a discount. Marketers often use this technique in product comparisons. For example, when browsing through smartphones, the most expensive model is shown.
First, when consumers see the premium option first, the other models appear more affordable by comparison. Now, let's explore another important concept called as loss aversion. People respond differently to loss and gains, but in general, people try to limit their losses as much as possible. The risk attitude spectrum shows that some people tend to avoid risk while others are more willing to risk. Interestingly, the same person can behave both ways depending ing on the situation. For example, someone may drive cautiously and buy a safe car yet smoke regularly or drink heavily. This shows risk preferences vary depending on the context as well. In general, however, people strongly prefer avoiding losses over gaining benefits. This is known as loss aversion. It is strongly influenced how information is framed. When a decision is presented as a gain, people usually prefer a safer option. But when A decision is framed as avoiding a loss. People become more willing to take risk.
For example, this is how marketeers use. Instead of saying save 10,000 rupees per month by switching, a marketer might say stop losing 10,000 every month. The second message feels more urgent because it emphasizes avoiding loss. This psychological principles show how consumers think, feel, and make decisions. By responding them, marketers Can design better purchase experiences influence buying behavior more effectively?
