Hello to all of you. My name is Dr. Hemantrathar and we are in the course Machine Learning.
We are discussing module 10 K-means Crusting Algorithm and this video will talk about various
other details with K-means Crusting Algorithm including complexity analysis. So the learning
objective of this video is we will look into what are the pros and cons of K-means Crusting
Algorithm and then we will analyze the time complexity of K-means Crusting Algorithm. So let's start with what are the pros and cons of K-means Crusting Algorithm because we are going to call the Crusting Algorithm. What are their advantages and what are their limitations? What are their strengths and what are their weaknesses? We are going to do it for all the algorithms as we move ahead. So what are the pros? Let's start with strengths. K-means is fast and scalable. So if we pass
it 100 points if we pass it 100 points if we pass it 10,000 points it still works fine. So it is relatively efficient for medium data sets. So if I pass 50 million data points K-means will start behaving poorly but it scales well till good number of points. It can handle good number of points. It is simple to implement. Four steps. Actually we are doing computation in two steps. Which is assignment of cluster assignment and recomputation of centroid. The very simple algorithm.
Core logic is very simple and easy to understand and it guarantees convergence. So it will guarantee that you reach a solution. It might be non-optimal global solution but it will guarantee that you will reach a solution. What are the limitations of K-means Crusting Algorithm? Apart you have to pass the data set along with that you have to pass the value of K as well.
How many groups you want to find. How many natural clusters you want to find in the data set. Sometimes visualizing the value or telling the value of K is extremely hard. All the cases which we have discussed in the past are two dimensional data. Where you can see how many natural clusters are there. If I give you 50 dimensional data how do you find, how do you identify the value of K? Finding the value or telling the value of K is an extremely hard task. We will talk about that later on as well.
But one of the cons of K-means Crusting Algorithm is that we have to tell how many partitions or how many clusters we need to identify in the data set. It is sensitive to initialization. So poor random initialization might give me suboptimal clusters. It is prone to local minima. My K-means Crusting Algorithm because of the greedy strategy might get stuck into local minima.
It struggles with non-global data. It struggles with non-global data. That means varying sizes, varying density, a non-global shape it cannot handle. And it is vulnerable and sensitive to outliers. What is the kind complexity of K-means Crusting Algorithm? It is I*K*N*D. Where I is the number of iteration. K is the number of clusters. N is the number of data points. And D is the number of data points. And D is the number of data points.
D is the number of dimensions. Very simple. I have given N dimensional data. Where the number of points are N. The number of dimensions are D. K is the number of clusters I want to find. And I is the number of iterations. Loop. How many times I want to iterate.
So one of the stopping conditions we saw earlier was number of iterations you want to run. So there are multiple convergence criteria. You can stop when membership is not changing. You can stop when centroid is not moving. Or you can stop based on hard value of I. By default in SKLN it is 100 as I mentioned earlier. So the time complexity of K-means Crusting Algorithm is I*K*N*D. Which is very good.
default in sqln it is 100 as i mentioned earlier so the time complexity of k-means clustering
algorithm is i into k into n into d which is very good as compared to other clustering algorithms we
will see those as well but k-means clustering algorithm time complexity is still very good as
compared to other clustering algorithm now i just said i into k into n into d let's derive it as well
let's try to address right i reached at i into k into n into d right so let's look into the algorithm
right the algorithm comprises of four steps right step number one is initialization of centroid
right so i have to build a random number generator which can help me in identifying initial seeds
initial location of centroids so random number generator that can be done in a constant time
right a random number generator can generate randomly generate initial location of centroid and that
can be constant so this step is constant time step number two right what is the time complexity we have
to think about it step number three right which is a recomputation of centroid we have to sort of think
about the time complexity of that as well and fourth is iterate how many times we want to iterate right
depends on i right so let's break step number two step number one constant step number two cluster assignment step right so what is the time complexity of cluster assignment step what essentially we are doing in this step what we are doing is let me draw a tiny data set and then discuss it
so this is let's suppose mu1 this is let's suppose mu2 what we are doing in step number two assign each point to its nearest centroid so what is the complexity of this step what we are doing we are computing the distance between this point and the centroid right we do it for all the n points for all the right so i have to compute distance between p1 and mu1 p1 and mu2 right so we have to do it k number of times
for each point for each point k means number of k means number of k means number of cluster so 0.1 mu1 0.1 mu2 0.2 distance between 0.2 and mu1 distance between 0.2 and mu2 and we do have to do it for all the points so n into k into d if it is a d dimensional space right to d dimensional data x2 minus x1 right two dimensional data y2 minus y1 two dimensional data it can be n dimension so n into k into d is the time complexity
complexity of right step number two right step number two right step number two right k into n into d is the time complexity of step number two what is the time complexity of step number three which is recomputation of centroid how do we recompute the centroid right we recompute the centroid so once i know this is the cluster this is the cluster how do i recompute the centroid take average of all the points in c1 take average of the points in c2 right so average of all the points here
right and here would be summation of would be n right we have to do it for d dimension we have to do it for k clusters so n into k into d right so for recomputation of centroid the time complexity is again k into n into d right so that is why right the total complexity is n into k into d into i number of iterations right and that is how we calculate the time complexity of k means cresting algorithm
which is i into k into k into k into n into d what are the best practices in k means cresting algorithm right there are some post-processing step but what are the overall best practices scale your data please normalize your data if your data is not normalized k means cresting algorithm might give you very poor results second thing right finding the value of k this we will come back and discuss in detail right we are just holding this for a while i can use some
additional measures like elbow method like elbow method schilioid score to find the good value good candidate value of k right we will come back to this after a while maybe in the next few modules right initialize smartly right because of poor location of centroids it might give me suboptimal clusters so i might use k means plus plus or i might run multiple times to handle this problem right to handle this problem
run k means multiple times please make the interpretation of k means clusters out of k means with the help of k means with the help of a domain expert right so let domain expert actually look into the clusters and try to find out whether whatever patterns we are trying to get from the clusters are we getting them properly or not whether we validate the final clusters with the data context or not so in summary in this video we looked into we said that k means cresting
is extremely fast and simple cresting algorithm is extremely fast and simple cresting algorithm but it has some limitations in terms of it is vulnerable to outliers and etc etc and we looked into time complexity of k means cresting algorithm which is i into k into n into d thank you for attending today's video take care bye bye
you
you
you
