


  Page 1 of 5


K8s Architecture Overview Transcript
Let's understand Kubernetes architecture in a very simple way that helps us map to
real-world use cases. In this demonstration, I'll explain this from two perspectives. First
is the internal Kubernetes architecture, like what happens inside the cluster.
Then second one is external application view, how multi -tier architecture is managed
on Kubernetes. And finally, we'll connect everything with one full flow, like how a
request comes from the internet and reaches a container inside a concept called pod.
Basically, internet till Kubernetes cluster, how the journey looks like, we are going to
cover all of that.
Now, don't worry about memorising the names, just focus on who does what, right?
That is the main agenda for this. Coming to the big picture, I want you guys to frame
before we move ahead, is remember one golden rule. Kubernetes is just a manager
for containers.
It decides where the container should run, how many should run, what to do if
something crashes. Everything else is just different parts helping Kubernetes do their
job. Remember this golden rule while we move ahead with our external application
architecture.
So this is Kubernetes from an engineer's perspective. First is a node -based
responsibility. Now, here we see three different nodes, front -end, back -end and a
database node.
Nodes are nothing but servers with operating system like our EC2 instances or virtual
machines. Kubernetes doesn't specifically require any front -end or back -end nodes.
This is just one possible design for you to map it to an actual real-world use case.
Each nodes that you observe here runs couple of pods and each pods runs the
containers. Let's discuss about the pods. Pods are considered as a smallest
deployable unit.
A pod is one or more containers. It shares the network and a storage. In real life, front-
end pods manage the user interface.
Back-end pods manage the APIs and the database pods manage the database
processing. What Kubernetes does on a pod level is it scales the pods, not the
containers directly. As in, it will try to add more number of pods if the existing pods are
not able to handle the job.
If two pods are not able to accommodate the request, Kubernetes has some
mechanisms which will automatically add two more pods over here. Pod number 3
and pod number 4. That is what Kubernetes does when it comes to managing a pod.
And the container inside this pod, this is where your application logic runs.
If you remember the docker practical lab which we have performed, how we have tried
to simulate an application running inside a container. Similarly, each of these



  Page 2 of 5


containers that you see inside the pods, these containers also run a certain logic. To
deep dive more on the containers, these containers hold your application code.
They have your runtime and the dependencies required to run that particular
application. Kubernetes doesn't care what language you use. It could be a Java,
Python or even Node.js. All of them are same to Kubernetes.
This is how it looks from an external point of view, from an engineer's point of view.
Now, let's look into the internal Kubernetes architecture. You'll notice Kubernetes is
divided into two parts in this image.
The first one is the control plane and the second half is the worker plane. Think of it
like this. Control plane is like a brain and worker plane is like a muscle.
Control plane does not run your application. It only decides what should happen. Let's
break it down simply based on the parts that we have inside this control plane.
The first one is API server. This API server is considered as the entry gate. It is the
heart of Kubernetes.
Everything goes through the API server. No shortcuts, no exceptions. You can think
of it like if Kubernetes was a company, API server is the reception desk.
Next comes our etcd. This is the memory. It is just a key value database, which is a
part of your Kubernetes.
It stores what pods should exist, how many replicas are there, what is the configuration
data, what is the status of your cluster. You have all this information in the etcd. So, if
etcd goes down, Kubernetes forgets everything what is going on.
That is why etcd is treated very carefully in production. Next, we have a scheduler.
Scheduler decides who goes where.
Now, imagine you say I want to run three pods. The scheduler decides which worker
node has enough CPUs, enough memory without any conflicts. This is what it is going
to plan.
It doesn't create the pods. It just assigns them to a node. So, in the previous image
when we were discussing that if two pods are not able to accommodate the request,
Kubernetes has a mechanism to add two more pods.
That decision making lies with the scheduler. So, I'll repeat that once again. It doesn't
create the pods.
It just assigns them to a node. Moving on to the next element, which is controller
manager. This is considered as the fixer of Kubernetes.
This is a component that constantly asks is the cluster matching the desired state. Like
you want three pods, one pod crashes. Controller manager notices this and a new pod
is created automatically.



  Page 3 of 5


That's what we call it as self -healing in Kubernetes and this is where it comes from.
So, controller manager always looks for the desired number of pods and the actual
number of pods. When you are building up your Kubernetes cluster, you decide that
two pods are sufficient to run all of my tasks inside this database node.
And later on, after some monitoring, you've come to a conclusion that two pods are
not sufficient. So, I would require four pods to be present all the time to process and
accommodate all the requests coming into these two containers. You'll make some
changes to the files and you will say that I need four pods always available on the DB
node.
If one pod crashes, the controller manager will observe that and it will try to replace
that dead pod with a new one. So, this self -healing happens from the controller
manager. So, this is how all of these components together rely on the decision making
of your Kubernetes cluster.
As you can see, API server is interacting with every little service that you have. It has
a connection on the worker plane. It is interacting to all the components of your control
plane as well.
This API and this kubectl and UI that you see outside of it, these are nothing but the
commands that we run in our terminal or command prompt. The moment we run
Kubernetes commands, kubectl is how we run our Kubernetes commands. So, it is a
very advanced concept.
That's the reason I'm giving you an overview for this. The moment you run a command
of kubectl, that command will be picked up through an API and the first request goes
to the API server since this is the entry to your Kubernetes cluster. From here,
depending upon what type of a request you're trying to raise, the kubectl command, it
will try to interact with the relevant components of the Kubernetes and get the job
performed.
So, our journey, we only see this part. All of this control plane and the worker plane,
these are behind the scenes. You don't get to observe or see what is going on here.
Now, moving ahead to the worker plane, this is where your actual application runs.
Here, it is all about decision making, analysing and validating. Here is where the action
takes place.
So, the first interaction that you get is through a kubelet. Kubelet is a node manager.
Kubelet runs on every worker node.
So, its job is simple. Talk to the API server, make sure containers assigned to the node
are running properly or not. If something crashes, Kubelet reports it back.
Going back to the previous example, when we decided two pods are not sufficient, we
require four pods and one of them has crashed due to some overload or any throttling
performance. So, that news will be picked up by the kubelet, informed to the control



  Page 4 of 5


manager and control manager will replace it with a new one. That is the reason we
call kubelet as a node manager.
Coming to the container runtime, which is the docker. So, this is the software as
discussed earlier in the docker lessons. This is a software that actually pulls the
images, starts the container, stops the container, all of these activities related to your
docker.
Kubernetes doesn't run containers directly. It asks this runtime to do it on its behalf.
Because docker and kubernetes are separate.
Docker is where you run your applications. Kubernetes is something that helps you
manage your containers on a global level. Moving on to the next part, which is kube
proxy.
This is a networking helper. Kube proxy handles internal networking, any kind of load
balancing the traffic between the pods. Let's say you have two pods present to launch
your website over the internet.
So, whatever traffic that you are getting over the internet, that request are transferred
onto these two containers. Between the internet and these two pods and this front-end
node, you have a kube proxy in between. So, you don't configure it directly.
It just works in the background. It comes with the kubernetes architecture, again
behind the scenes. So, internally, control plane decides, worker plane executes.
That is how the entire architecture works in kubernetes. Let's try to understand the
end-to-end flow. Let's connect everything.
This is the most important part. First, you get a request coming from the internet. To
access a front-end website or to save some details into the database attached to that
application.
So, traffic enters your cluster. Then, kube proxy takes over. It will route the traffic from
an internal component called service.
Service is another component that we define within our kubernetes cluster to navigate
among these pods. Since we have numerous pods, here you can see like 8 or 8 nodes
and roughly around 10 pods inside them. But in production, we have hundreds of pods
present under multiple nodes.
So, to make sure that the request that is coming in from the internet is reaching the
right pod among multiple nodes, we use a component called services. That will direct
the traffic to whichever pod the request should reach. So, once the request comes in
from the internet, kube proxy will take over and route the traffic.
Then, the request finally reaches the pod which is inside a container and the
application processes that particular request. Next, the response goes back. Which
means, the way it came, it is going to travel back to the same flow again.



  Page 5 of 5


Like, from the container, it will go back to the pod. From the pod, it will go back to an
internal service. Service will go back to the internet via the kube proxy and the user
gets a response.
Whatever, whether it's a successful response or it is a failure response, it is a try again
response, whatever it could be. All of this entire flow that I just mentioned to you, this
happens in milliseconds. This is the reason why kubernetes is considered as the
modern technology and many applications in today's world are reliant on docker and
kubernetes.
So, to summarise kubernetes in one single sentence, kubernetes is a system that
decides, runs, monitors and fixes the containers automatically. Control plane things,
worker node work, pods run the applications, services handle the traffic, kubernetes
handles the failure and you are going to focus on building the applications. This is how
the entire architecture of kubernetes works.


------------------------------------------------------End-----------------------------------------------------
