


  Page 1 of 6


Docker installation & container management
Transcript
Module 7, Lesson 2, Practical Lab. In this practical lab, we are going to practically
learn how to set up Docker, how to use it and manage it for a production level projects
with a simple demonstration. Before moving ahead, just to give you a quick recap,
Docker allows us to package an application with its dependencies and run it
consistently anywhere.
So this is what Docker is all about and why we use Docker. Basically it solves the
problem of it runs only in my system or it doesn't run in my system. Whatever
application you have built using whichever programming language, Docker will make
sure that your application that you have built using a specific programming language
is run on every operating system at every environment.
Now let's start with setting up our Docker to extend our practical lab, more practical
activity. First, once you type in Docker desktop like this, you'll find the first link coming
in from Docker. So once you land on this page, when you click on this Docker desktop,
you'll have multiple options whether whatever operating system that you are using,
choose your operating system and download it.
Then extract the file and do the installation process just the same way how you do it
for regular softwares. Right. Once you are done with downloading this Docker
application, open your command prompt or your terminal and type in this command to
verify if Docker is installed successfully or not.
When you see a response something similar to this, that's a confirmation that Docker
is successfully installed in your system. Now let's try to open the Docker desktop and
go through this graphical user interface and observe what is going on, what all options
do we have to manage, how can we do it, basically the do's and don'ts. So, the first
thing whenever you are willing to work on Docker, the first thing you should observe
is the engine is on, it is in the start or it is in the pause state.
So always make sure that before you run any Docker commands, you resume your
Docker engine. Once you resume your Docker engine, that is when Docker will be
active and you can run all of your Docker commands. Now, apart from this, we have
certain options wh ere we can observe how many containers we have built and how
many containers are running with our application inside it.
How many images have we created? What are the images that we hold? You get each
and every details about your containers, images, volumes. What is the build history,
every little detail that you've been performing using Docker. Each and every activity is
tracked in here.




  Page 2 of 6


Right. Now, time to get our hands dirty with Docker. Let's do all of this exact activity
from the CLI, from the command line interface.
So we'll try to containerise a simple Python's data processing script with the help of
Docker. So what we'll build is a Python container that reads a small data set, which
means a list of numbers, calculates the mean and then prints the output. Right.
Something simple. We just want to understand how does Docker allow us to run an
application. So two ways to do this, either you can just, I'm currently I'm using IntelliJ
as an IDE, so you can use VS code or any other software that you're comfortable with.
So create a project like this and let's try to assume that we are building an application
in Python. So let's say I just want to create an application like app.py. Inside this, I'm
going to just add a couple of numbers to demonstrate the result. Let's say I have data
and mean, I want to calculate the mean.
So I want to print a particular, if you are aware of how Python works, then there
shouldn't be a problem. But it's absolutely fine if you do not understand, because you
don't have to know the programming part to work with Docker. Right.
So all of this is before you start working with Docker. Right. So it is OK if you do not
understand this.
All I'm trying to do is just try to create a simple Python script that replicates like an
actual application. So this has a certain logic and I want this logic to be run whenever
my Docker is Docker container is active. So this represents a basic data proc essing
task, something that every data scientist does on their day to day activities.
Right. Not at this level, something more advanced as well. Now, assuming that this is
our actual application that we want to run through a container rather than through a
remote server to run this through a Docker container, we need to create a Docker file.
So the extension, you do not have an extension for Docker file. It is just capital D with
Docker and file. You do not have a .dy or .d, anything as such.
Right. Once you see a file created with the logo in Docker, then you can start creating
your actual Docker file. Docker file is the first stage towards your container.
So we have common instructions in Docker like from, workdir, copy and cmd. The from
defines the base environment. So we don't instal Python ourself.
Docker gives it to us. For that, we use, we just define a base image like Python 3.10
slime. So this is the name of a Docker base image.

This is a prebuilt image provided by Docker. Right. So the moment Docker file runs
with using the Docker daemon, it will understand that the user is expecting a base
image that is prebuilt already.



  Page 3 of 6


So this comes from a Docker community. They have multiple prebuilt images like this.
So I'm just using one of them.
Next comes the workdir. So this sets the working directory inside the container. Right.
So think of it like navigating inside your container. For example, if this is, since this is
my operating system, currently I have this project running on the desktop. So on the
desktop, when I want to get to this particular project, I say cd and I give th is name of
this directory.
Similarly, we are doing exactly the same with the workdir. So I'll say I want to set my
work directory to this path like slash app. Then comes our copy instruction.
Copy as the name says, moves the file from one machine into the container image.
Right. Since container is considered as an isolated operating system inside your
personal laptop
So the files present in your laptop should be transferred into the container so that the
application can be run. For that reason, we use this copy instruction to move all the
files from our machine into the container. So here, since this is our only file w hich
contains our application logic and everything.
So I'll just mention this name. Then comes CMD command. CMD, this instruction tells
Docker what to run when the container starts.
The moment a container is ready, when you want your container to perform certain
actions, all those details you're going to mention in this CMD. Right. So here I'm going
to mention that I want to run my Python based application.
And this is the name of the file. So what happens is I'm telling my container Docker
that the moment container is up and ready, pick this file and try to run this file.
Normally, if we had to do this exact command, this exact instruction on our own, we
just want to verify if there are any errors or there is any mistake going on.
So what we do, we just open the terminal, we say Python 3 and we provide the name
of the file. So then what happens automatically, the lines of code present in the file,
they start to read and get executed. I'm trying to print data set and the mean value o f
that data set.
That's the reason you see the data set provided list and then the mean value. Right.
Let me correct this is a typing error.

So the mean for the provided data set is 30. Similarly, whatever logic that you have
inside your code files related to your application software or any website that you're
trying to launch. This instead of app.py, you just have all of those files in your directory
in your project directory.



  Page 4 of 6


Right. Now, instead of doing it manually from here, what we are doing is we are since
we are trying to run this application through Docker. I'm mentioning exactly the same
thing through this CMD instruction.
So Docker file is not executing the code. It is defining how the image should be built.
Right.
So if I save click on control s and save these details and there is a command that we
use whenever we want to convert a Docker file into a Docker image and that image
will further be used to run your application inside a container. Right. The first process
Docker file is created.
Now, the next process is to convert it into an image. The command for that is Docker
build hyphen T can give any name that you want. I'm saying I'm giving here my name.
So this will be the name of my image. So you have to give a space and a dot. OK.
So I think there is one mistake which I have done. So we need to provide the file name
clearly. So I forgot to miss a dot.
Let me do that again. Docker build and the name. So now my image is in progress of
being built.
This might take a couple of seconds should not take long enough. OK. So now my
image is built successfully.
Just to verify if my images are built. If I say Docker images. So one image that I just
created 12 seconds ago is reflecting.
Right. Now from the Docker file I have a Docker image which tells my container exactly
what to do how to perform and where to look for details. Now that we have all that all
the information needed to run our application inside a container.
Let's actually try to create a container and run this image inside it. So the command
for that is Docker run. You have to provide a name.
So the name of the container I would say again my container. Now that you have
provided the name you should also provide what image would you like to use to run
inside your container. So the image that we have is my image.
So I'll just say my image. The moment I run this command. You'll see the same result
what we have seen earlier when we were individually trying to verify if there is any
logic missing or any syntax error in our application code.

Whatever result that we got a successful result. Exactly the same result we are getting
the moment I created a container and I have made it active. Now just while I was trying
to create a container the application started running.



  Page 5 of 6


Because at line number 7 the CMD command which we used. We have defined that
the moment container is live run this particular application. That is the reason as soon
as it is active it ran this particular command and it has given us the result.
So the container ran the script and exited. This is pretty much a batch style  data
workload. So if I say there is a command to show the containers to see what all
containers do we have
So docker ps hyphen a is a command which displays the containers. At the moment
we have one container. This is the unique ID.
This is the image used for this container. This was the command that was provided to
run the moment container is active. This is the status of when it was created when it
got exited.
And what is the name of that container. We use this name. It means it is OK when if
you do not if you delete this part from the command.
Because we use this name flag in the command that we can remember easily
remember this unique ID is kind of challenging. That's the reason we use this name
flag to run a container while we are creating it. So if we verify the same within our
docker desktop if you see our image which we have built is present over here.
The container which we have created is also visible. Currently it is not running because
the logic which we have mentioned was pretty much a three second job. So it ran the
logic and the container is exiting.
It is no longer in running status. So when if you want to run it or start the container
again you just use this start button from here or you can just mention docker start and
the name of the container. So this is how you use your applications to run inside your
docker containers.
Now the last step is to clean up our resources whatever we have created since these
does not have any value to add for us. So I'm going to just delete or clean up these
resources. If I want to remove a container I would say docker RM which stands for
remove and I'll mention the container.
Next I'll do the same with image. Since we are removing image we have to add an I
RM I and the name of the image that you want to delete. So this is how we can clean
up our resources instantly.
Again all of our images and containers are deleted. So to summarise containers are
disposable. Any container that you create you can dispose it anytime but the images
are considered as reproducible.




  Page 6 of 6


The reason behind that is you have this docker file already with you. You can create
another image using this exact docker file. All you have to do is run a docker command
docker build hyphen T and give another new name.
Initially what we have done. We just use docker build hyphen T. We gave a name like
this my image. This was the command which we used to create an image.
If you want to use exactly the same file or maybe you have changed from what you
have added another file which you want to be part inside the container along with
app.py. Let's say you have a readme.md file or any other configuration file. You want
even those to be part of your container. So you add that details on this line and you
create a new image.
You can give any name that you want. You can say revised image or modified image
and you just click hit enter and your image will be created. This is exactly the reason
why we say images are reproducible and containers are disposable.
So to summarise we wrote a docker file built an image ran a container stopped it and
then removed everything a cleanup of our resource so that we do not have additional
load on our system for something that we do not need. This is the complete docker
container lifecycle right from a file to a container. In this demonstration we learned how
to create a customised docker image using a docker file The core of docker in many
industry graded projects.
This is how we use docker in production levels but there are also prebuilt docker
images which are for everyday use available through the docker community via docker
registries. You will explore these in the upcoming lessons. So stay engaged and keep
the excitement going.

            ---------------------------------THANK YOU--------------------------------------
