OK. So, what we have done so far, we
have created the original FP 32 model,
and then we have also created
compressed version of that, that is, uh,
uh, INTD 8 model, right? Now, let's uh
quantify and uh compare the original FP
32 model and the new uh INT 8 model
across size and latency to understand
the trade-offs, OK? So, The quantized
uh inta model that was uh 4X is smaller
than our original model, but a smaller
model is uh useless if it's uh not
actually faster, right? So, in this
script, uh,
Uh, L2 benchmark.PY. Here, we are gonna
see uh how to quantify the trade-off,
OK. So, we are going to run a head to
head benchmark comparing our FP 32
model against our uh intake model on
two critical dimensions, the file size
and uh the uh inference latency, OK?
And here, we are not evaluating
accuracy in this uh script uh since uh
we are working with a baseline model
without uh actual uh validation data.
OK. Uh, however, accuracy is a crucial
metrics when working with uh real
models, and uh, I encourage you to
explore accuracy evaluation on your own
using a, uh, different model from
hugging face and uh Uh, validation data
set to understand how much, uh,
accuracy might be impacted by
quantization. So this is an important
part of, uh, compression workflow in uh
production environment, OK? So, this is
our script. It's uh designed to give us
a fair comparison. Uh, it defined two
models here, uh, the base model and
then, uh, inta model. And the benchmark
model function here.
Uh, is almost identical to one from our
last module. It takes a model path to
run a, uh, uh, warm-up, uh, and then,
uh, execute a 100 times, uh, inference,
run to get stable average and, uh, uh,
P95 latency numbers. So, this gives us
a clear picture of performance
improvements from, uh, uh, quantization.
OK.
So, let's uh run this.
Uh,
Is the command, uh, we are running
benchmark.
The script will take a moment as it uh
benchmarks both models running the
latency test for both uh FA 32 and uh
uh uh in date, right?
And uh at the end, it prints the
summary table. Yeah, here it is. Uh,
and, uh, this put all key performance,
uh, information we need to make a
decision in, uh, one place, right? So,
let's, uh,
Break it down. So this table tells a
compelling story. So if we talk about
uh size, So this is the most obvious
win. We went from 44 MB to 11 MB, right?
That's a 75% reduction. Which is a huge
for any application where uh you know,
uh, storage or download size matters,
uh, like an edge device, right? So here
it's shows the difference clearly. Uh,
then if we talk about the latency, so
look at the performance on CPU. So, the
inta model is uh significantly faster,
just 7 seconds it took. Uh, both the
average and uh uh P95 latency are lower
here, you can see, right? So, this
means our model can process request
more quickly, uh, leading to a better
user experience and, uh, uh,
potentially lower cost in a high
traffic, uh, cloud environment, right?
So these two metrics, size and latency.
Uh, show clear wins from quantization,
but in a real production scenario, you
would also measure accuracy to
understand the full trade-off.
Typically, quantization results
in a small accuracy drop as we
sacrifice some precision in the model
weights. So the key question becomes,
uh, is a potential small accuracy drop
worth the gain? In size and speed,
right? So, for many applications, this
trade-off is uh highly favourable.
Yeah.
So, yeah, you can try different model
from hugging face, uh, you can
experiment with real data, and you can
check uh how uh accuracy is dropping uh
if you are using quantized model. So,
yeah, you can uh try it by your own.
