Hello everyone. Welcome back. We have
reached a pivotal moment in the Spark
execution process. We know that Spark
is lazy.
And we know that actions trigger the
work, but what exactly is the master
plan that Spark creates during that
waiting period? And how that master
plan actually gets executed when we hit
any action command. So let's understand
this with a mockup.
So here if you see right, Spark is lazy.
So let's say you create a mapping
operation, a map, a philtre, you see
the line edge or your directed acyclic
graph is getting created as we click on
any operation. So basically you add any
operation in your code, the spark. The
executor will actually take it and
it'll record the lineage and store it
but it won't trigger any action. It
won't execute the directed cyclic graph
when you hit any action command, right,
let's say in this case let's hit this
count. When you hit the count, then
only your dag starts to get executed.
Similarly, let's move to the coding
walkthrough. So we have created a very
simple mockup with a code which can do
word count job, right? It is basically
if you give a text file to the Spark
job, it will do the word counter. So
let's start the tracing of this dag as
well. So first, what happens is a dag
gets created. So let's say when your
first line gets executed, Hadoop will
create RDDs to read data from the text
file and store it into separate blocks.
In the next step, it starts the mapping
operations.
In the further next steps, it starts
the pairing operations, but it comes
under the map category. So here you see,
right, both of these operations are
coming under the narrow dependencies.
But then the actual reduce operation
comes in where we are trying to count
the pairs, right? So here shuffling
will come up and the white dependencies
comes into the picture.
And when we reach the last stage where
the actual reduction is happening and
the reduced operation is taking place,
So before that, shuffle happens, and
this is the first stage of this
particular job. So this is how you see,
right?
A single code will involve certain wide
dependencies, certain narrow
dependencies, and multiple stages.
We'll discuss more concepts regarding
Apache Spark in our subsequent modules.
Till then, happy learning. Thank you so
much.
