Hello to all of you. My name is Dr. Himant Rathaur and we are in the Machine Learning course. Today,
we are going to start with Module 3, Introduction to Machine Learning. Today's video is on Foundations
of Machine Learning and Supervised Learning. So, the learning objective of this video is, we are going to define what Machine Learning is and what's its fundamental purpose. We are going to differentiate between supervised learning and unsupervised learning and we will look into the core concepts of supervised learning along with what is classification and regression. So, let's start right away. So, what is Machine Learning? So, for example, there is a small child and you want to
teach him how to recognize a cat. So, how you are going to do that? So, to the child, you are going to show a cat and say any animal which has four legs, pointy ears, whiskers, tail and meows is a cat. So, child will look at the animal or the image of the animal and will try to understand it. You do this step again and again. That learning will
will be done by the child. This is called traditional way of learning where we are given the data and we will tell what exactly to look right in that data. So, these are the features or these are the pointers we are showing or pointing out in the animal or image of the animal so that the person can learn. On the other hand, in Machine Learning, if we are using
Machine Learning, we are going to show thousands of pictures of cat to a model, to a classification algorithm such that it will automatically learn patterns and features to associate images with the cat. So, in Machine Learning, we will not exactly point out the rules that can separate one animal versus another animal or different animals rather than we will let Machine Learning algorithm learn itself to distinguish
between animals. So, this is the case of animals. So, this is the case of animals. We will see a lot of examples as we move around. So, Machine Learning is a science of getting computers to learn and act like how humans do. By learning patterns from the data without explicitly programming them with the rules. So, when we are building the Machine Learning model, we are not telling exactly what the rules are to separate different animals. Let we
So, we will let Machine Learning model, we will let Machine Learning model, we will let Machine Learning learn itself to distinguish between animals. So, in the traditional way of programming or learning, we will have input, we will have set of images and we will have set of rules and that is how we are going to generate the output. But in Machine Learning, what we are going to do is, first we are going to define what is the problem statement. So, the problem statement is, can we distinguish between cat and dog? So, I want Machine
learning model to distinguish so given an image it can find out whether that image is a cat or dog
right so this is a problem statement what we have to do to build this solution machine learning model
first we have to collect the data so we will collect thousands of images of cats and dogs
or maybe lakhs of images of cats and dogs once we are done we are going to do data pre-processing
we are going to process the data we have seen data pre-processing in the last semester we are going
to do data pre-processing and creating data ready for the next stage in the next stage we are going
to build a classification model using a classification algorithm right so for example i can use a dishean
tree or a random forest or a rule based classifier to build a model so these algorithms can be used
to build a model so i will select an algorithm and i will train the algorithm to build a model so now
let's suppose i have a dishean tree model to identify whether a given image has cat or dog
right once this model is built once the algorithm is selected so here i have many algorithms like dishean
tree random forest naive base svm so one of the algorithms i am going to choose and then train the model right on the original data set once that is done then i am going to evaluate the model and then train the model right on the original data set once that is done then i am going to evaluate the model and then train the model right on the original data set once that is done then
then i am going to evaluate the performance of the model which i am going to evaluate the model which i have built by evaluation that means given the new images whether it is
so this is how the model is able to classify differentiate between cat and dog once that is done the performance is good enough i am going to deploy it in real world so this is how a machine learning based
approach will solve this problem here we are not explicitly telling the algorithm how to distinguish between cat and dog right it will look into thousands of images and automatically find patterns such that it can distinguish between cat and a dog right so in traditional way we are telling it in the form of rules but here we are not telling what sort of rules machine learning algorithm automatically extract rules or develop rules that is the same as the machine learning based approach will solve this problem here we are not explicitly telling the algorithm how to distinguish between cat and dog right so in traditional way we are telling it in the form of rules but here we are not telling what sort of rules machine learning algorithm automatically extract rules or develop rules or
so if you broadly look into machine learning there are three types of approaches supervised learning there are three types of approaches supervised learning unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning agents so what do you mean by supervised learning in supervised learning we learn with the help of a teacher or a guide and i will talk about what do you exactly mean by teacher and guide as we move along the idea of supervised learning is it is used to do
some sort of prediction so we learn with the help of a teacher and guide and in future we are going to use supervised learning model to do prediction in unsupervised learning we learn without a guide that means we do not have class labels i will talk about what do you mean by class labels as we move along and the idea of unsupervised learning is to find patterns structure in that
patterns and structure which is inside the data so in unsupervised learning we are not going to do any prediction no prediction we are going to find pattern and structure in data and in reinforcement learning the basic idea is we learn by trial and error right with the help of rewards and penalties based on the actions we are taking so in
in this machine learning course we will focus on supervised learning and unsupervised learning in next few courses you will look into reinforcement learning as well so machine learning as i said can broad be divided into three types of algorithms supervised learning algorithms unsupervised learning algorithms and reinforcement learning algorithms and reinforcement learning algorithms now as we discussed in this course we are going to discuss more about supervised and unsupervised learning so let's discuss supervised learning
versus unsupervised learning so as i said in supervised learning the basic idea is that i am going to train a model and i am going to use it for knowing the outcome or doing some sort of prediction so in supervised learning right basic idea is we want to know the final outcome or the answer key and for this we are doing prediction so if the answer is yes then we are calling it as supervised learning if we are not worried about outcome
or the outcome or the answer key if we are not worried about prediction or outcome or answer key this is called unsupervised learning so in supervised learning we are worried about outcome we are designing systems for outcome and answer key based on the predictions we are doing in unsupervised learning we are not doing any prediction we are just learning patterns and structure in the data so in supervised learning one category of algorithm is called classification so supervised learning has many types of algorithm
one is called regression one is called regression one is called regression one is called regression so let's start with classification so as i said in supervised learning we are given a helper and the idea is we are going to use it for doing some prediction so in supervised learning the training data comes with a supervisor or a learner which can help us in finding doing the correct prediction so what is a supervisor
supervisor supervisor supervisor is the training data along with the class labels so training data along with the class label right essentially is my supervisor the goal is the model will learn the mapping between the function which correctly maps the input to the output label so in input what we are given let's suppose we are given the tabular dataset something like this here in supervised learning you will
we will have attributes and the class label right so this attribute 1 2 3 let's call it as x right this is my data so in this what we are going to do in classification we are given x which is the data and the class label which is y so let's call it attribute 1 attribute 2 and attribute 3 as x and class label as y so we are given x and y what
what we want to do we want to do we want to do we want to build a function f right where if we give x it can do prediction y right so in supervised learning the basic idea is we are given the data set and the class labels right we are given this relationship right the data set and the class label and we want to build a model f such that if we are given this x or if we are given this
x1 it can predict what we are given this x1 it can predict what is the class label right so once we have built this model f right it would be used to do prediction for the unseen data right once you have built this function f now in this f you can pass x1 x2 x3 x4 and so on and for that it can predict the corresponding y so the mapping between this x and y will be done by this classification algorithm f right very simple right let's
take some examples and try to understand it better what do you mean by supervised learning so in supervised learning as i said you are given a data set so this is my data set
right and it has some attributes attribute 1 attribute 2 and the corresponding class label so what is this problem statement so given an email i want to identify whether the email is spam or no spam so if you are using gmail if you are using yahoo right
there is a spam filter which can identify whether the incoming email is spam or no spam because you do not want to bombard your email with some junk emails right email inboxing with some junk emails so for that what you want to build is a classification model right which can distinguish between spam emails and non spam emails not spam emails right
so you want to build a classification model given an email it can identify whether the particular email is a spam or no spam so for that what you have to do first step is you have to correct the data now you have corrected the data you have this is a tabular data with three columns so this is email 1 this is email 2 and this is email 3 right attribute 1 is looking at the content of the email attribute 2 is
who is who is the sender of the email and attribute 3 is the class label the original label of the email now for example email 1 is a spam email right email 2 is a non spam email and email 3 is a spam email right so i have corrected this data now what is the aim given a fourth email where the content is something and it came from something can i predict
so i can predict whether that email is a spam or no spam so now here this is my x this is my y right and i want to build a function f a classification model f where if i pass x4 it can predict whether the email is spam or no spam right so this is the example of classification model or algorithm so here we are
we are given supervisor what do you mean by supervisor we are given the class labels and the original data we are given the data and the class label and we want to build a function right that maps x to y so that given a new x i can do the prediction in the future right so the model learns the features of the email like what are the words i'm sending what is the sender's email id whatever whatever and try to find association between attributes and
the label so here i have two labels so here i have two labels evil can be spam or no spam right so the label column here is the supervisor or the key right answer key right so this is called supervised learner in supervised learner we are given x the original data and the corresponding label y right and the idea is if you are given a new x can you predict y right this is called supervised learning what do you mean by unsupervised learning unsupervised learning unsupervised
learning means here we are given any labels or correct answers the idea of unsupervised learning means here we are not given any labels or correct answers the idea of unsupervised learning is to find pattern structure or distribution in the data right so here the problem statement is given the data right so here if you look if assuming i am given a tabular data here you will have some attributes attribute 1 attribute 2 attribute 3 attribute 2 attribute 3
you will not have you will not have class label here there is no supervisor there is no answer key in unsupervised learning so there is no class label here this is not there only x is there y is not there now given x which is attribute 1 attribute 2 attribute 3 and so on what you want to do in unsupervised learner in unsupervised learning you want to find patterns in
this right so the goal of the model the clustering model right so in unsupervised learning there are various categories of algorithm one category is called clustering in clustering the idea is to find patterns or underline structure or distribution in the data right so simple analogy of this can be we are given a box of fruits right and there are various fruits inside it we are asked to sort these fruits
based on color shape and size right so i am not worried about what type of fruit it is i am just saying that red fruits put in one corner green fruits put in another corner white fruits put in another corner so i found the pattern in the data white fruits are in one corner red fruits are in another corner green fruits are in another corner so this is called unsupervised learner we are not worried about what type of fruit it is we are just saying that the pattern is
white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in one corner white fruits are in another corner so we are just finding pattern in the data we are not predicting what type of fruit it is or what is the name of the fruit we are just trying to find a pattern in the data and this is what we do it in unsupervised learning so in unsupervised learning we are only given x we are not we are not we are not
given y and the idea is to find pattern in the x for example let's suppose i have been given a tabular data like this tabular data and there are three attributes there is no class label here now i want to find pattern in the data right so the pattern in the data is if i look into attribute 2 i can find that customer number 101 is purchasing grocery items only customer number 102 is purchasing tech items
and customer number 102 is purchasing is most likely a new parent purchasing baby items right so this is a pattern we are just finding a pattern in the data so this is most likely a grocery shopper this is like more like a tech shopper and this is like a more new parent so this pattern we are identified we are not doing any prediction here so in unsupervised learning the idea is to find the pattern nothing else no prediction so what is the difference between supervised learning and
unsupervised learning and unsupervised learning in unsupervised learning in unsupervised learning we are given x and the class labels and the corresponding class labels in unsupervised learning we are only given x no y this is unlabeled data this is labeled data the goal of supervised learning is to do prediction of labels or class labels or outcomes the goal of unsupervised learning is to find discover
hidden patterns and distribution in the data the approach in supervised learning is called classification algorithms or regression algorithms in unsupervised learning the algorithms are clustering and association rule mining algorithms and the analogy here in supervised learning is a student is learning with the help of a teacher and in unsupervised learning we are discovering patterns on our own right there is no one helping us in discovering the pattern so when we look
into supervised learning as i said the basic idea is to find prediction is to find prediction is to do prediction right is to do prediction and there are two ways of there are two categories of algorithms for prediction one is called classification and another one is called regression classification and regression classification and regression when we are predicting discrete number of classes discrete category or class labels then it is called classification for example
if this y the column y the column y has only discrete number of values two values spam and no spam this is called classification problem another example can be antivirus a file can be malware or benign bad or good cancer detection cancer or no cancer all these are classification problem because the number of classes the number
of attribute values unique attribute values unique attribute values of y are discrete in nature fix 2 3 5 limited typically you will see limited number of classes 2 to 10 not more than that right so if you have discrete number of attribute values of y then it is called classification problem if y has infinite number of values then it is called regression problem for example i want to predict petrol price for tomorrow whether it will be
101 100 100 or 101 or 110 petrol price prediction is a regression problem because y value can be 100 101 102 150 so on right gold price prediction talk price prediction all these are regression problem we are predicting something and we are predicting a continuous numerical value we are predicting a continuous numerical value we are predicting a continuous numerical value so in supervised learning there
there are two categories two groups of algorithms classification there are two categories two groups of algorithms classification there we are predicting finite numbers of class labels and in regression where we can predict continuous numerical values so if you look into classification right let's suppose look at this diagram this is a binary classification problem because the y the number of y's are two what are y's here they are squares and circles squares squares
and circles now the idea of classification is that you are given some data points right these are my data points some of them are square some of them are circle now i want to build a model that can separate these two classes i can do it with the help of a line or a plane or a curve depending on my use case but the classification means that you can separate the classes why you want to separate the classes so let's suppose
suppose once you have built the binary classification model here and a new test sample is given to you this is my test sample and for this i want to predict what is the value of y so on the left hand side of this line it is square and on the right hand side of this line it is circle it is circle so since this test point is on the left hand side of the line we are going to predict this test sample it is a square
if my test sample if my test sample was here then i would predict class label of this test sample as circle right so in classification the basic idea is how do you separate the classes so that given a new test sample can you predict the class label for it it can be a multi class classification problem as well here you have three classes so here you had two unique values of y here you had three unique values of y circle triangle triangle and a pentagon
So now I have to build a classification model that can separate these three classes.
So if the test sample is here, it will be predicted as triangle. If a test sample is here, it will be predicted as a circle. If a test sample is here, it will be selected as some pentagon.
So basic examples of classifications are:
In classification, we are doing prediction. We are predicting finite number of values. These are predefined finite number of values.
Three defined finite values. So spam detection, whether email is spam or no spam is a classification problem.
Image recognition, what does that particular image contain? Whether it contains cat, dog or a bird. Three classes.
So image classification, this is a three class classification problem. Spam detection is a two class classification problem. We call it as a binary classification problem.
Medical diagnosis, whether the person has a tumor or no tumor. So malignant and benign.
Binary classification problem or two class classification problem. Sentiment analysis.
Whether the sentiment of a particular election is positive, negative or neutral.
Three class classification problem. Why three classes? There are three unique attribute values of Y here.
What are the three unique attribute values? Positive, negative and neutral.
All these are of example of classification. Classification is used for doing prediction. And here Y values are fixed and finite.
Typically in this cases you see number of values of Y are 2 or 3.
In case of regression, again we are doing prediction. But we are predicting a continuous value. Here Y is a continuous value.
Now think about it. So let's suppose I have been given all these data points and I want to predict.
For this test sample, what would be the value of Y? So this is let's suppose X, this is let's suppose Y.
This is X and this is corresponding Y. So assuming this is age and this is salary.
So as this is your age of a person and this is the salary of the person. Age of the person. Salary of the person. Age of the person. Salary of the person. Age of the person. Salary of the person. Age of the person. Salary of the person.
Now given a person of this age, I want to predict what would be salary. So for doing that what we have to do? We have to build a relationship, a regression model such that we find the mapping between age and salary.
So here salary. Such that given a new age, can you predict the salary of the person. So here salary can be 100, 101, 150, 101, 10 lakh or so on. So since salary is a continuous attribute. Any salary can be of any number. Right. Any number. It's a continuous value function. So this is called a regression. So again Y we are predicting but Y is a continuous function here. Right. So simple example. Right. Speed.
So if the speed and the stopping distance. There is a relationship. If the speed is high. The stopping distance is also high. If the speed is high stopping distance is also high. Speed is low stopping distance is this much. So if my car speed is this much. Can you predict what would be the stopping distance. And that is what we are doing it with regression. In regression.
So if we are trying to build a relationship between X and Y. Such that given a new X we can predict Y. But Y value here is a continuous value.
value. So if we put all together, machine learning is broadly divided into three categories:
supervised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. In supervised
learning, the task is to do prediction. It is done with the help of class labels. Supervised
learning is broadly divided into two types of algorithm: classification and regression.
In classification, we are predicting finite number of classes. In regression, we are predicting
infinite number of values and that is why we call it as regression. So in summary, in this
video, we looked into the basic idea of machine learning, we looked into the basic idea of
supervised learning and unsupervised learning and we looked into what is classification and regression. We will continue in the next video as well. Take care. Bye bye.
