Welcome back, learners. Now that we've
understood one hot encoding. Let's also
implement it in Python and gain a
deeper understanding. All right,
learners, so let's implement one hot
encoding in Python. In this video we
will implement the same example that we
saw in the last video so that it
solidifies your foundations, right?
Let's go. So first things first, let's
import pandas that will help us handle
data frames. Now let's create a sample
corpus, or data for one hot encoding.
It's a list of three sentences I love
NLP. I love AI and NLP is future, right?
Let's print this. So we have our data
ready. Once the data is ready, the step
one of implementing OHE is to create
vocabulary. What is vocabulary?
Vocabulary is the list of unique words
used in data, right? So what we're
doing here is, first, We're taking all
the sentences and joining them into one
single string, right? And then I'm
putting a dot split method on it to
tokenize this one single string, right?
Let me run this individually and show
you so that it makes much more sense,
right? So I'm taking documents and I'm
running a dot join on the space, right?
So what this will give me, it will take
all the three sentences and convert
them into one single string, right? Now
what I want to do is to run split on it.
What Split will do, it will take, it
will break the string based on the
white spaces. So now I have the
individual tokens. I love NLP I love AI,
NLP is future, right? Now
I will convert this into a set. What
this will do is it will remove all the
duplicates from my list, right? So you
see, now I have only a set of all the
unique words in my documents, and this
essentially is the vocabulary.
Additionally, what I will do is I will
sort them alphabetically.
Right now it is converted into a list
again. Perfect. So let's run this.
And I'll delete this. I hope you've
understood this step right now. Once I
have my vocabulary ready, what I need
to do is to create the one hot encoding.
For that, what I'll do is I will create
an empty list first called one hot
vectors, and this will store all my one
hot encoding embed.
One hot encoded embeddings, right? So
what I'm doing, I'm running a loop for
doc in documents, which is basically
this, right? So for all the sentences
in the documents, do a doc.split. So
basically I'm doing tokenization here.
Now I'll create a 0 vector. What is a 0
vector? It will take this list of 0 and
multiply it with the length of this
vocabulary, right? Let me show you what
that looks like.
Right? So how many words were there?
123456, and how many zeros are here?
123456, right?
So now I hope this made sense to you.
Now I have my zero vector. I will run
another loop for token in tokens, if
token in vocab. So if my token is part
of this list, right. Then do what? In
your 0 vector, replace that 0 with 1.
Simply that's what's happening here in
this time, and then append it in this
list, right? Let me run this.
So what will this one hot vectors, this
list look like?
It's a list of lists, and every
individual list corresponds to
the sentence in the original data set,
right? So I love NLP has been converted
into this word vector which is 011001.
Similarly, I love AI has been converted
into this word embedding, right now to
display it better, let me convert it
into a data frame.
Right, so the index has all the
sentences in my documents, and these
are the scores assigned for each word
in the vocabulary. So I love NLP, will
assign 1 to i, 1 to NLP, and 1 to love.
So I love NLP, right? And the rest, all
the words will be assigned 0. Similarly
for all the other statements. So this
matrix right here. Is my one hot matrix,
a matrix of one hot encoded embeddings,
right? I hope you enjoyed this. Now the
practise for you is to run the same
algorithm on your own data set, right?
This will give you much more
understanding into one hot encoding.
That's it for this video. I'll see you
in the next one. Thank you.
