Hi everyone. Welcome to the Hanson Lab
7. In this video, we are going to
establish a crucial baseline for a
pre-trained, uh, convolutional neural
network, OK? Before we can say we have
optimised the model, we need to know
how it performs out of the box, OK? So,
we will look at two key metrics. First,
uh, How big the model is on disc, and
the second, uh, how long a forward pass
takes, uh, on a standard CPU. OK. And
uh these baseline numbers are what we
will compare against uh when we move to
the ONNX format and uh ONNX uh runtime
in the next couple of minutes.
OK. So let's uh explore the code. I
have, again, I have created the lab 7.
You have the requirement.txt. Uh, all
the new dependencies are there.
So let's open.
Uh, here you can find all the details.
So here we have a script for Uh,
baseline first. Let's install the
dependencies.
UV
pip install.
Requirements.
Yeah, I got installed. Let's open the.
Baseline first. Baseline script. And
here you'll notice that uh We'll start
loading a pretained uh resonator 18
model from a torch vision, OK?
Uh,
And we are uh picking resonate 18
because it's a realistic, uh,
well-known architecture, but still
small enough to be fast for our demo,
OK? So, we immediately call.eval here,
model.eval.
To set it to entrance mode and move it
to the CPU for a consistent.
Baseline. OK. Now, a quick note, you
can absolutely explore any model from
hugging face that we learned about in
the first lab, transformer, vision
model, or any other architecture.
However, for uh simplicity and uh to
keep our focus on the optimisation
techniques themselves, we are using
this uh simpler CNN model that is uh
resonator 18.
But feel free to iterate through this
entire process with the hugging face
model. Doing so will deepen your
understanding and give you hands-on
experience with uh optimising the more
complex models you'll encounter in uh
real-world scenarios, right?
So, yeah, coming back to the script, uh,
next, uh, we see the models. Uh, into
the desk. OK. Uh, you can see here. And,
uh, this file resonate baseline, uh.
Uh, Resna 18_baseline.pt uh represent
our baseline, uh, model artefact. So,
we then use Python OS model to get its,
uh, size, size of this model, and this
size in metabytes in our first key
baseline metrics, we need to know this,
uh, so we can see if, uh, other format
like ONX, uh, uh, offer any size
reduction, OK?
So now for our second key metrics,
latency, we create a random dummy input
tensor that matches the expected input
shape for Uh, resonate 18. OK.
Uh, and before we time anything, we
perform a warm-up loop here. The first
few inference run on a model can often
be slower due to things like uh memory
allocation or library installations, OK?
So, the warm-up ensure our measurements
are stable and uh representative of uh
steady state uh performance, right?
Then we have the main loop here. So in
the main timing loop, we run inference
100 times and record the duration of
each forward pass. Here, uh, we are
interested in both the average latency
and the most importantly, the P95
latency. The 95 percentile tells us the
latency value that 95% of requests fall
under, giving us a much better sense of
uh worst cases, uh, user experience
than a simple average, right? So now
let's uh, uh, run the script and
establish our baseline. So to run that.
Uh, again, you have this, uh, read me
over here where you can find all the
details. We have already installed the
dependencies. Uh, now let's, uh, run
this file.
Um,
Clear the terminal with this command.
So basically, we are running the first
script that is baseline.py. Executed.
And what this script basically does,
the script print out the model size and
the latency metrics at the end. And it
also saved uh this number into a JSON
file. We'll, we're gonna see that.
So if you see here, uh,
It gave you total parameters, how many
parameters we have, checkpoint size,
average latency, P95 latency.
And uh baseline summary. And let's go
back to the Jason.
Uh, baseline metrics. Jason. So here
you can see the same information we are,
uh, keeping it here. So this gives us a
persistent record of our baseline that,
uh, our Nexus script can use for
comparison. So these are the, uh,
numbers to beat basically, right? Now,
the question here is, why did we go
through all this trouble of
establishing a baseline, right?
That's because optimisation without
measurement is uh just uh guesswork, OK?
So we need to know where we started, so
we can quantify our improvements.
Right? So think about it this way.
Uh, if someone tells you that, uh, they
made a model that run faster, so, your
first question should be how much
faster? And, uh, to answer that, you
need to have a reference point, right?
And that's exactly what our baseline
metrics provide here. But here is the
interesting part. If you, if we talk
about Pytosh, so Pytoch is already
pretty good at inference. It's a
natural product, uh, well optimised
framework. So the question becomes, uh,
can we do better? And the answer is yes.
But we need to use the right tool for,
for this job, OK? So, this is where uh
ONNX uh runtime comes in. So, ONNX, uh,
which uh stands for uh Open Neural
Network Exchange, uh, and it's a, it's
an open format for representing machine
learning models. But more importantly
for us, ONNX uh runtime is a high
performance inference engine.
Especially designed to squeeze uh every
bit of performance out of your models,
OK? And ONNX runtime uses a variety of
optimisation technique, things like uh
graph optimisation, operator fusion,
and hardware specific uh accelerations.
Uh, so, basically, it's designed from
the ground up with uh one goal in mind,
that is uh fast interference. Well,
Pytorch is uh a general purpose
framework that uh handles uh, uh,
training, debugging, experimentation,
and inference. We have already seen
that, right? Uh, but ONNX runtime is,
uh, laser-focused on making inference
as fast as possible. Uh, there are lots
of, uh, other inferences in available
in the market like VLLM. So, uh, for
most of the deployment, uh, like, uh,
for LLM models, we use VLLM. You can
also explore, uh, VLLM, uh, in
production, we usually use, uh, VLLM.
But yeah, for this lab, we're gonna see,
uh, on ONLX.
So, yeah, in our experiment, we are
gonna use same model architecture, same
input image, same performance metrics.
The only difference will be the
inference engine. So, this gives us a
true apple to apple comparison. So,
what we are comparing here, Pytosh
inference and then ONX uh and inference,
right? And here is what makes this
exciting. We are not changing our model
accuracy at all. We are not, uh,
Uh, retraining, anything?
We are not making any sacrifice to the
model capabilities. We are purely
looking at inference optimisation. If
ONLX runtime is faster. Uh, that's, uh,
free performance, better latency with a
zero trade-off, right? So, let's move
forward and see what kind of speed up,
uh, we can achieve. It could be 10%, 5%.
Uh, uh, maybe even more. So, now, the
best line is set. Uh, now, let's see
what optimisation, uh, can do.
