Welcome back, learners, to this lesson
on vanishing gradient problem.
We as humans are excellent at
maintaining context over long periods.
Imagine this example, right? A big
paragraph that starts with, I grew up
in France, followed by multiple
different sentences and paragraphs, and
in the end says, I speak fluent.
What should be naturally the right
answer? French, right?
Why? Because the paragraph started with,
I grew up in France, so it's natural
for the person to be fluent in French,
right? To predict the word French, the
model needs to remember the word France
from way back in the sequence. While it
is very easy for humans to do that, but
RNNs seemingly fail at that. Let's look
at why.
In theory, RNN should be able to handle
this. We saw that it handles memory,
right? If you remember HT 1.
RNNs in practise fail miserably.
They're great at reading the context,
for example, the clouds are in the sky,
but terrible at long-term context, for
the example that we saw in the previous
slide, right?
So what's the reason for this, you may
ask? The main culprit here is back
propagation through time, right? So
back propagation that starts from the
latest word to the first word. So when
we train a neural network, we calculate
the error or loss at the output and
propagate it backward to update the
weights, which is back propagation. In
an RNN, this error must travel
backwards through time, from the last
word to the first word.
Now, as per the chain rule, to
calculate the gradient of an early word,
we multiply the gradients of all
subsequent steps.
Now the trap here is that if the weight
matrix. Has value smaller than one.
Example. 9.
Multiplying it repeatedly.
Causes the result to shrink towards
zero. So 0.9 into 0.9 into 0.9 into 0.9,
say 100 times, would lead to a number
that's 0.000001, right? Which is almost
zero.
This almost 0 leads to the vanishing
gradient effect, which means the
gradient becomes 0.
And when the gradient becomes zero, the
signal dies.
So the gradient. Becomes so small that
the weights at the beginning of the
sentence stop updating.
And the RNN effectively stops learning
from distant past. It only remembers
the last few words, which causes it the
amnesia. Now the natural follow-up
question should be what if the weights
are not less than one and they're
greater than one. In that case, the
gradients can grow exponentially.
So you can imagine, 1.1 into 1.1 into
1.1, say 100 times, can become an
exorbitantly large number.
The consequence, the model weights
become Nan, or not a number, and then
the training crashes. The solution
This is easily fixed with gradient
clipping. Capping the maximum value.
Vanishing gradients, however, require a
smarter architecture to overcome this,
like the LSTMs, which we will look at
going forward. Now imagine whispering a
message to a person who whispers it to
the next and that person to the next
and that to the next. What Vanishing
gradient will look like is that the
whisper gets quieter and quieter until
the 10th person hears nothing.
The exploding gradient will look like
the whisper getting louder and louder
until the 10th person is screamed at.
The solution is giving the people a
walkie talkie, or a cell state, like in
the LSTMs, to pass the message clearly
without distortion.
And that's it for this video, and I'll
see you in the next one. Thank you.
