Hi again. In this video, we will explore the color psychology wheel and how colors influence perceptions and emotions. So what is color psychology? If you have ever wondered why we use a particular color in a particular instance. Color psychology is a framework that helps us decide what color we should use at what particular instance and how different colors create different emotions and vibes in our minds. If you have ever wondered Why we use a particular color in a different instance? The answer is color psychology. Colored psychology helps us understand what colors create what kind of emotions and vibes in our mind. For example, in this image you can see different shades of red creates different variations of emotions and vibes in our mind from excitement, passion to desire. Similarly, a color like blue signifies a technology that you can trust upon. A color like Violet signifies creativity. A color like green talks about reassurance and things related to nature and also as we move along the shades of those particular color the emotions and vibes changes which you can see in the image on the screen.
Now also try to look at how bright and soft colors plays a role in our mind. Research shows that both men and women generally share similar preferences for light and dark colors. However, Differences appear when it comes to color intensity. Studies suggest that men tend to prefer brighter colors while women are often more drawn to softer colors. These preferences influence how colors are perceived and the kinds of emotional responses they create.
Now let's explore another important category. Acromatic colors. Acromatic colors are colors without any hue. These are basic colors like black, white, and shades of gray. Research suggest is that men generally tolerate acromatic colors more than women. Even though these colors may appear simple, they can create a strong visual impact and vibe and influence perception in different ways across the mind of your audiences.
Now let's look at another important concept in color design that is tints and shades. A new study have shown that women generally prefer tints more than shades which may be linked to greater sensitivity to subtle color variations. A tint is creating by adding white to a color, which often gives you a softer, youthful, and calming feel. A shade is created by adding black to a color, which usually creates a deeper, stronger, and mysterious tone. Understanding the difference helps designers and marketeers choose color tones that match the emotion they want a brand or a product to convey.
Now that you have explored different color types and how it influences different perceptions, it important to remember one key point. Human perception is very complex. The emotions we associate with a color are not universal. They can only be influenced by personal experiences, upbringing, cultural background and even our mood at that particular moment. So while color psychology provides a useful guidance, individual perception and a mood at that particular instance will always play an important role in how colors are interpreted."
