Welcome back. In this video, let's dive into another important framework which is known as the brand architecture pyramid. The brand architecture pyramid, also known as brand pyramid or brand hierarchy, is a strategic framework used to organize and visualize the core elements of a brand identity and personality and its relationship with its consumers. It starts with tangible product features at the base which is basically features and attributes and builds up to intangible brand essence at the peak. Let's understand each of this level of the pyramid through real brand examples.
Let's begin with Indigo Airlines. What's its features and benefits? Its features and benefits includes like on-time performance, courtless stuff and spotless interiors. What are the functional benefits? It's a lowcost airline with high performance. What are the emotional benefits? It's affordable and dependable. What's the brand core and essence? It's sincere yet fun, spunky, and young brand. It kinds of positions itself as making the dream of every Indian flying come true.
Next, let's look at Apple. What are its product and feature attributes? It has got a rich user interface, water resistant, slim design, iOS operating system. Product benefits, it's highly secure, elegant, and easy to use. What are the emotional benefits? There's a premium status associated to it. There's a sense of belonging. There's a sense of exclusivity associated to it. What are its brand personality? It's non-corporate. It's very artistic. It's sophisticated. And it's very creative. And what are its brand code or essence? Think different. It's how they position it.
Finally, let's explore Disney. The product attributes of Disney would look like it's a familyfriendly animation, cartoons, and pictures. What are its product benefits? It's of reliable quality, great value, more select in-house branded content. What are the emotional benefits? Family bonding, joy, nostalgia, childhood memories. What are its brand personality? Young at heart, classic, playful, very heartwarming. And what's its brand core or essence? It positions itself as the happiest and the magical place on the earth.
As you can see in the last few videos, a very strong brand builds clear features and benefits at the base and rises to a powerful brand essence at the top. That's the strength of brand architecture pyramid. It helps brand organiz and elevate their identity. Clearing strong connections with consumers.
