Page 1 of 3


Create and Use IAM Roles Transcript
In this demonstration, we are going to understand how to create a role and how to
attach certain services to this particular role. Firstly, just to clear out or give you a small
heads up, users are for humans. The users which we created at this list is for  the
humans who could log in and use it, the whole console basically.
Roles are for the AWS services, which means if you want a particular service to
interact with another service, you do that with the help of roles. So, roles act something
similar to a pass. Let's say there is some huge event at a huge city and certain people
are invited for that event.
If there are two types of passes, one is a VIP pass and one is a guest pass. So, a VIP
pass is someone who has extra privileges and a guest pass is someone who is going
to sit in the audience row. So, depending upon the pass, the security guards are going
to navigate them in that conference.
Similarly, rules also act exactly the same way. The services that you see over here,
let's say if there is this but any service wants to interact with some of the database
services over here. Let's say a some service from the compute wants to interact with
these one of these database services.
Now, how do they do that? We can use role and create a particular role saying that
anyone who has access to this role can talk to this Amazon, Aurora or RDSS. So, in
short, a role is just another identity which will help two services to interact with each
other. Now, these two services can be under one account or they can be under
different accounts.
If one service from my account wants to interact with one service which is created in
your account, we can use roles as a mode of authorisation and have our services
interacted with each other. Now, let's try to create a role and understand better. So,
click on create role.
You have multiple options. So, if you want to create a role from a service level, you
use the first option AWS service. You can choose any service that you want out of this
list.
Whether it is for an EC2 instance, it is for a storage service, for a database service or
a monitoring. Any tool you have, almost you have every tool that you can use this role
with. Next is the AWS account.
So, here when you want to set up the connections between other accounts, then you
can use another account or you are using through this account, you can use this
option. You can also enable multi-factor authentication when you're trying to use with
other accounts like this. So, you have multiple other options.
Just to keep it simple, we're going to go with the default option which is AWS service.
Let's say I want to choose EC2 service and we have different options over here like




  Page 2 of 3


what you want to do, what permission do you want your role to have related to this
particular service. So, here this says allow EC2 to call AWS services on your behalf.
This seems fine. I want this particular activity to be performed on my behalf with the
help of this role. So, I'll just stick to this default one.
I'll click on next. Now, what permissions does this role have? You have only selected
the service in the previous step. Now, what all can my role do with that particular
service? So, let's say I want to provide only the read-only access to that particular EC2
instance.
So, I choose this read-only access for my EC2. Anyone who's trying to use that role to
interact with my EC2 service can only have read-only permissions. They cannot write.
They don't have a write or an administrator level permission to delete or modify. So,
this is the only permission I want. So, you can choose multiple more than one.
I'm choosing read-only in this case. Click on next. I can give it a name like I can say
EC2 read-only role.
You can add a simple description to someone who's new to the team. He wants to
understand what this role is about, what all permissions does it have, what all can it
do. You can give a simple description in your own language.
And this is a JSON format where whatever we are trying to do by clicking certain
buttons, everything is written in a JSON format which we call as a policy. If you
remember the policies which we have tried to interact with in the previous
demonstration, this is exactly the same. You don't need to understand what is going
on here.
This is just for the internal purpose. Whatever we are trying to perform in these three
steps, it is just trying to convert that into a code. So, the permissions it has is only the
read-only permissions to an EC2 service.
Click on create role. My role will be created automatically. You see this was the role
that I have created.
So, this is how you can create any role, attach any permissions, and use that role to
interact with other services whether in the same account or in a different AWS account.
I'm saying different AWS account because companies usually do not rely on one single
account. They maintain different accounts within one cloud or maybe within multiple
clouds also.
So, to make sure that they have a proper communication, they have a proper
authentication to interact with the services and make the application run, roles are the
foundation in those perspectives. That's all.

------------------------------------------------------End-----------------------------------------------------




  Page 3 of 3
