Page 1 of 2


Access Keys and Security Best Practices Transcript
In this demonstration, we are going to understand what access keys are, where they
are used, and what is the best practises for this. So access keys are nothing but these
are certain credentials that can be used when you want your AWS to interact with tools
and services outside of AWS. Where can you find these access keys? So these are
related to your user.
Whenever you go to your user, let's say I'm going to my non-root user, I'm working on
a project which has an integration with let's say another tool like Terraform, for
example. So if I want my AWS to interact with Terraform, I need to have something
called access keys. Access keys are a mode of authorisation or a bridge between my
AWS and any third -party tool or a service outside of AWS.
So when you go to the user, you click on security credentials, you scroll down, you
have the access key. There are two ways to use access key. One is you also have
something called as CLI, command line interface.
So if you click on this icon over here, so we use a proper coding approach where we
can interact with our AWS services. Whatever we have tried to do so far like creating
a user role or a group, we have done manually. Like we have tried to navigate through
different options over here.
We clicked on certain buttons and then we got the outcome. But whatever you have
done, you can also do it through a command line interface like this using certain
commands. We have a proper documentation of how to use CLI, what commands to
frame when you w ant to create, modify or manage a particular AWS service.
Access keys are going to be used in such scenarios. So every laptop has a proper
command and interface from a Mac's perspective. If you're using a Windows laptop,
you have something called as command prompt.
So from here, you type in multiple commands and you interact with different services.
From your personal laptop, when you want to access this AWS console from any
location, you use access keys. That is the purpose of having access keys.
You can create these access keys for different purposes, whether it is for the CLI, for
a local code or for any third-party service. Usually, we go with the CLI because CLI is
the most easier approach preferred by the developers or anyone who works heavily
with the code. So all you have to do is select the option, check box the requirements,
click on next, add a proper tag value.
Let's say you want to maintain different access keys for different services. Let's say
you want to use GitHub account with your AWS. You can say GitHub keys or give any
meaningful name and click on create key.So it will generate two types of keys, access
key and a secret key. So both of these  are required whenever you try to build a
connection between GitHub and AWS. Now that's a different concept.




  Page 2 of 2


How do we integrate these different services as one? That is an entirely different
concept. But access keys are the mode of communication. They act as a bridge when
you want two third -party services communicating with each other.
You can download the CSV file and this will be present only once. You don't get to see
this again. So either you watch it from here by clicking on show or you download the
CSV file from here.
Never ever expose these access keys and secret keys to anyone, not to your fellow
classmates, not to your friends or family. Having this access key and secret key or
having access to your user's name and password will definitely lead to a misuse. So
always keep these details very secure.
If you feel that these details are compromised, you can always go back and delete
these access keys. So you have something called as actions over here. You can
deactivate or delete instantly like this.
So it is going to ask you to type something in order to confirm the deletion. So it is just
asking for this key name. So I'll just add that and after deactivating, I can delete it.
So now I don't have any access keys. So no one could misuse this. So always make
sure that you delete or clean up any resource that you have created or you think if they
are compromised.
This is a very important security lesson because your UPI or your credit card or debit
card is attached to this AWS account. Whatever billing you're going to get, it is going
to be auto-debited. So you won't even know until you realise a huge chunk of mone y
is deducted from your bank account.
So be very mindful when you work with these account details. Always try to reset or
try to create a new resource. Even if you have any doubts, just try to delete.
You go to the users or you can do it from here also. You have multiple options whether
it is a user or a role. Just select and delete.
It's going to ask you to confirm. You type in confirm and delete. So making sure your
account is secured is your responsibility.
AWS can only take care of making it easy for you. When it comes to managing the
security, it is your responsibility. That's all.

--------------------------------------------------------End---------------------------------------------------
