Page 1 of 3


4 Practical Lab AWS Account Setup
Walkthrough Transcript
Module 4, Lesson 1, Practical Lab. In this practical lab, we are going to set up our own
AWS accounts. Throughout this programme, we'll be learning all the tools and services
within AWS from a theoretical and a practical point of view.
So, first once you type in create AWS account in your browser, you'll see a page like
this which says account. When you click on that page, it will direct you to create your
own new account within AWS. At the top right, when you see this create account, click
on it.
When you get a page like this, you're supposed to provide your personal email address
which is active. You are aware of the password of that email address, something which
you use regularly. So, add the email ID.
So, I'm just going to add some email over here. You can provide a name. Let's say I'm
going to provide a valid name for this account.
Then, you click on verify email address. You'll be expecting an OTP for your account.
So, make sure your email is active.
Provide the OTP that you received. After that, once it is successfully authenticated,
you can provide a decent password over here which satisfies all of these conditions.
Do not use any repetitive passwords because AWS fetches your password once you
enter over here.
It is going to give you a hint that a password is used many times and it is exposed out
in the public. So, try to use a password which has never been used, which has a
complex pattern rather than ABC, other 8123. Avoid such kind of patterns or using
your names or mobile numbers.
So, give a random password. So, I'm giving some random password over here. Then,
you click on continue.
So, we have total five steps. Now, once you land on this page since we do not want to
incur or invite any payments while we are trying to learn and practise. So we'll prefer
the free account which is for the six months.
So we click on choose free plan. Now here from the two options we can go with the
personal either one is fine. Provide your full name, your mobile number, you can add
any mobile number over here, country and add your address details, your city, postal
code, then checkbox it and click on agree and continue.
So this is step two out of the five. OK, seems like I have to provide an actual phone
number. So after that, once you provide your personal details, it will bring you to the
payments option, which is step three out of five
Here you have two options. One, you can either use your UPI for auto payments,
wherein you have to provide your personal UPI ID. And apart from this, you have an
option which is for to choosing your credit or debit card details.
Make sure that whenever you choose your credit or debit card details, they have to be
enabled for international transaction. Otherwise it will keep on throwing some error.




  Page 2 of 3


For easy authentication, just go with the UPI auto pay because UPI is something we've
been using for a while now.
So it avoids any complexity. Once you complete the payment after this, which is step
three of five. So from here, I'll be there, I'll be telling you from the document
perspective, because adding all the details would already my credit card is already
involved in another AWS account.
So I would not be able to do it again. So to avoid that, I'm going to show it to you what
the next step is going to look like. So we have reached this stage, this step, wherein
we have to add the payment.
After you add your UPI ID and the transaction is made. So the transaction, it's not
going to deduct huge amount. It will deduct like two rupees and it will be refunded.
It's only to verify if your bank is active for the international transaction or not. Post that,
it will ask you to provide your mobile number and it will send an OTP to verify if it is an
active mobile number or not. After that, it will ask you to choose a support plan.
Again, you choose the one which has a free tier support post that you'll have a
complete end page which says that your AWS account is up and active, which means
you are ready to start using your console account from here on. So once you set up
your own acc ount, once everything is set up, it will take max to max. It will take 15
minutes to make it active.
In some cases, it gets active within two minutes. So best case scenario, you can wait
for five or 10 minutes and then you go on to the sign into your console. When you try
to sign into your console, it will ask you for the email and the password.
So you add your email ID. One thing to remember, since you're creating it for the first
time, you have created the account for a root user. So when you're trying to sign into
your account, you're supposed to choose sign in as a root user.
Over there, you add your email ID and the password which you have used to create
the account. After that, you see an interface like this. It's going to look completely
empty because you haven't used any of the services before.
It's the first time. So it will look something similar to this. Let me walk you through this
entire interface so that you can navigate easily.

The first thing is this is your account ID. Always make sure that you copy and save this
account ID, the email which you have used to create your root user account for this
AWS cloud and the password. Do not miss these details or try to lose these because
if you lose these and any service is running, then the bill keeps on coming up and it is
very complicated to have your account reopened because you do not have such
features as forget password or those kind of options.
So be very mindful and save all the details. This account ID, the email ID which you
used and the password. You either note it down somewhere or you use a Gmail
account, whichever you're convenient with.
Just use a secure approach and save these details. Once you get inside your AWS
account. So just to show you how the everything looks like.




  Page 3 of 3


So when you click on this button, you see different services of different categories. So
if I just had to show you this compute. So you see various compute services involved
within AWS.
If you go to all the services, you have the services listed from an alphabetic order. For
database, we have multiple services that we can work with database. Similarly, we
have for IOT, ML, many services, we are going to go through most of them through
the process.
Specifically, we are going to focus on the important services of AWS throughout this
programme. Now, once you're now that your account is created, the first thing that
you're supposed to do is set a budget so that you do not exceed or incur more billing
unknowingly. For that, you can go to account ID, you select the option billing and cost
management.
This is where we are going to set our budget. So on the left hand side, if you scroll
down, you see something called as budgets. Over here, you click create a budget.
We can use this default settings, use a template, zero spend budget, since if you don't
want to spend any money, you just want to practise everything without spending any
money. You can choose this zero spend budget in case in future when you want to
when you're working on a project and you want to highlight or showcase something,
then you can choose this monthly cost budget. Template is going to be the same, it is
just the questions are going to change a little bit.
So let's go with this one for now, which is zero spend budget. What we're trying to do
is we are trying to set an alert whenever zero point zero one dollar is going to be
charged based on our usage. Right.
So you give a valid name over here. So this is going to be a default name. You can
give any unique name to have added bits to this particular default name.
You can add any of your names like learning, demo, introduction, whichever name
which you feel valid. You add an email ID over here for which you want to send or get
the notifications when a threshold is exceeded. So you can add your personal email
ID over here for notifications.
After that, you click on create budget. So let's say I'll add some random Gmail ID over
here. So I click on create budget.
Now, we have a budget whenever one dollar exceeds based on our usage, this is
going to turn unhealthy. We are going to have a notification on the email which we
provided, and we can also see the status frequently. All you have to do is click on
billing and cost management.
Then you scroll down, you see something called as budgets. You click on this budget.
You see your budget plan over here.
Right. So depending upon your usage, you keep on getting multiple forecast, the
amount that is being used and everything. You can also download the report if you
have multiple budgets like this.
Right. So this is all for today. I'll see you guys in the next practical lab.
That's all.
-----------------------------------------------------End------------------------------------------------------
