Page 1 of 4


Create IAM Users and Groups Transcript
In this module, we are going to have a practical point of view of using IAM, Identity
Access Management. As I mentioned earlier, in AWS, we never give permissions
directly to the people. We design the identity permissions and the access control very
carefully.
Now, what we are going to understand in this particular video is, we are going to learn
how to create a new IAM user, how to create groups, how to add that particular user
to a particular group. We are going to work on policies and we are going to log in with
our actual user that we have created. Now, before we get started, I want to show you
something which is kind of important when it comes to IAM.
For AWS, as we have learned earlier, we have a concept called as, all of this that you
see, United States, Asia Pacific, Canada, Europe, South America. So, there are total
17 regions and many more are going to be added in the upcoming times. So, each of
these regions have different subcategories and these are nothing but the availability
zones.
So, if you see for United States, we have four availability zones. For Asia Pacific, we
have Mumbai, Singapore, Seoul, Sydney, Tokyo and for Europe, we have Frankfurt,
Ireland, London, Paris. So, these are the availability zones and these are the regions.
A quick tip is, any service used in US East 1 available region which is in Virginia, our
billing is less when we use in this region because this is the first data centre where
Amazon has launched and many services are cheaper in this particular region. So,
this is the reason majority of the projects operate when they want to work on this cloud
platform. So, that was about regions and availability zone.
The reason I'm explaining this once again over here is, for IAM, whatever users roles
and policies we are going to create, they will be applied across all of this. So, it is on
a global level. It is not specific only to a region or to an availability zone.
Right. Now, let's get started. So, first thing is, we have to search with IAM at the search
bar that you see.
Click on it. This is where we manage our authentication and authorisation. When you
scroll to this list from the left side, you see various options, groups, users, roles,
policies.So, we are going to go through all of them. Now, IAM is a global service. It
controls authentication and authorisation for AWS.
Every request to AWS is evaluated by a IAM. Right. So, without IAM, nothing begins
at AWS.Now, let's try to create our first user on our own. So, you click. You see this
users under the access management section.
You click on users. So, here this is my user. I myself am not the root user for this
particular account because the team, the BITS team handles the actual root account.





  Page 2 of 4


If you guys remember in the previous practical lab, the account which you guys have
created, that is an actual root account. Right. And this account which I have logged
into, this is a non -root account, which means I am just a user as part of that root
account.
So, you will not see any names like this. Now, if you want to access as a non-root user,
this is how and where you create your new users. And it is always recommended that
you never access your AWS account from your root user because so many
permissions are there when you work at admin level.
You don't want to corrupt your services or permissions. So, it is always recommended
that inside your root user account, which you have created, you create your own
personal user on your name and try to log into your AWS account with your personal
user, the non-root user. Right.
Now, let's try to create our first user within IAM. So, you see this option over here at
the top. Right.You click on create user. Give a meaningful name. Like, let's say, I would
say student0011 or I would say student12345.
Right. You can give any name that you want or let's give a meaningful name. Non -
user.
Non-root user number one. So, this is the name that I want to give. So, looking at the
username itself, we should understand that this is not a root user where we could
manage every single operation.
Right. So, you can give any name that you want, like a dummy or a duplicate name.
You have to checkbox this so that this user has a proper access to your console.
Now, here it is better and recommended to always choose auto-generated password.
So, it will generate a random combination of small caps, capital letter, symbol and a
number. Right.
So, I'll tell you in a bit why that is recommended. So, for now, choose this auto -
generated password and always use this user must create a new password at next
sign in. So, this is an option which you can checkbox it or uncheck box it.
The reason being why this option is provided here, whatever auto-generated password
that you have, it is a combination of random patterns, probably difficult to remember
for anyone or whomever you want to provide this user details. So, what you're
supposed to do is you can checkbox this and whenever user tries to log in using this
root user name, they will be redirected to change their password to whichever one
they remember. Right.
So, that is the reason why we checkbox this so that the moment they log in, they can
create their own password. Now, after this, we click on next. So, we have three options
over here.





  Page 3 of 4


Add user to a group, copy certain permissions or attach a policy directly. So, as of
now, you would not see any groups over here because you have never created a
group. Right.
So, I have already created one group few minutes ago just to verify. So, but in your
case, you would not see this group. So, what you can do, you can just select attach
policies directly.
Now, what type of a user this is? If you want, if you're creating this user for your
personal benefit, for your usage, you can directly select administrative access so that
you can do anything within your AWS root account. Right. With this user that you have
created, you can do anything when you select administrative access.
So, you can choose any access and click on next. This is a review and create page
where you can see what is the name you provided, what type of a password is there.
Does it ask me to reset my password after I log in for the first time? I've chosen yes.And
these are the permissions that I have. So, I create create user and that's it. My user is
created.
This is the URL. This is the username. And this is the password.
I'm going to display this password. Anyways, I'm going to delete this user after a couple
of minutes. Now, whenever someone wants to log into this AWS account, they have
to use this username, this password and this account number.
Right. The same way how you have logged in after creating your AWS account with
your email ID and password. Similarly, you're going to use a username and password.
This time, you are going to log in as a non -root user. So, it will not ask for an email. It
will only ask you for the username and the password.
So, these two details would be required to log in as a non -root user. Right. You can
also download it and save the file or you can take a screenshot, whichever is required.
This password will automatically change because when the first time when you try to
access this particular user, it will redirect you to change the password. So, this would
be of no use. So, it is only going to be helpful for the first time.
Right. So, we return to the users list. Now, as you can see, I have one more user which
was created one minute ago.
Right. So, you can create as many users as you want depending upon your personal
use case. Now, after this, the next concept comes groups.
Now, groups are used to provide a particular set of permissions. Like in a team, if there
are developers, if there are database administrators, there are DevOps engineers,
there is a cloud team, each of these team members needs to have a different set of
permissions. Developers can have admin access.





  Page 4 of 4


DevOps and cloud engineers can have admin access. But the database administrators
should only have read access. So, you can create multiple groups like this and provide
a dedicated permissions for that particular group.
Let's say, I want to create a group called as cloud admins. This is the group where I
want to provide them each and every permission so that they can make any
corrections and change the configurations when something goes wrong. Right.
So, this is the name and out of two users, do I want anyone to be part of this group?
So, I want this non-root user to be part of this cloud admins. Right. Now, coming to the
permissions, what type of permissions should people in this group have? So, I can say
since it is for the admins, I can either choose administrative access where they'll have
access to each and every service like this.
So, within admin access, you have a lot of categories. So, as you can see, amplify is
a service, elastic bean stack is a service. So, try to expand the whole and then
observe.
So, this is the actual administrator access. If you want to provide, you can provide this
one. Next, I click on create user group.
Now, I have my user group ready which is create admins group and there is only one
user as part of this group. That user's name is non -root user. What permissions does
he have? He has administrative permissions.
Now, no matter how many users I create, if I add them to this group, everyone are
going to have the same set of permissions that are created specifically for this cloud
admins group. This is how you can provide a set of permissions directly to a particular
group. You can also add more permissions from here.
Let's say there is some kind of a database service like RDS and you want to provide
only the read-only access. Just because they are cloud admins doesn't mean they can
delete any database or make any changes. So, you want to restrict their access when
it comes to the relational databases.
So, you can provide read-only access so that they don't corrupt anything. So, you click
on attach policies and now they're going to have this permission also. So, this is how
you can create a user, add them to a particular group, attach any policy that you want
from here and the last part left is logging in using your created user.
So, I've already shown you what would be the name, what would be the password.
The moment you try to log in through that username and password it will ask you to
redirect. That's all.

-----------------------------------------------------End------------------------------------------------------
