Page 1 of 3


MFA Setup & Password Policies Transcript
In this demonstration, we are going to understand about the multi -factor
authentication, how to set it up and the password policies that we have created for our
users. The first thing is enabling the MFA, multi-factor authentication.
So whenever you go to your users, whichever user that you have created, you go to
that particular user and you navigate to security credentials.
If you scroll down, you have an option to assign your approach for this multi -factor
authentication. This can be of various types. Let's try to take a deep dive on this.
So when we click on this assign MFA, we can give a meaningful name and you have
three different options. The first one is an actual phrase or a passkey, which could be
a combination of different numbers like this. This is a default one.
You can add your own kind of a password that you want, own kind of a passkey or you
can use a default created one. This is the first option. The second one is an
authenticator app.
So if you guys have ever used this authenticator app, so we have a google
authenticator application in our android or in app store as well, wherein any particular
application you have enabled this MFA, you can just scan or an OTP comes within
that authenticator app.
You provide that details and you get inside, you log in and you try to navigate and use
your application accordingly. So this is the second approach and the third one is an
actual hardware device.
If you have ever worked in a product-based company where the security is very much
high, they are high compliance standards, probably you might have received kind of a
UB key or some kind of a hardware device which is connected to your company
provided laptop.
So you use that to get inside your private network of your company and you start
working on a daily basis. So you have three different options.
You can choose whichever you want and you can set up the passphrase accordingly.
So this is how you can enable MFA for your users. The user which I have created, so
it does not have any MFA.
So as you can see, it is giving a highlighter that MFA is not created. So I can create it
anytime that I want because MFA protects against any kind of password compromises.
In real companies, this is a mandatory console access.
It's a mandatory step. Without MFA, you would not be able to move ahead with the
other steps. Now coming to the second part of our today's demonstration is the
password policy.




  Page 2 of 3


Whatever password you have created for this particular user, initially you have an
auto-generated password which was a combination of different patterns. Then you
have selected an option which will ask the user to reset the password when he logins
for the first time. Whatever password he tries to use there, you don't want that
password to be the permanent one.
That is when you use password policy. Password policy is something that helps you
to rotate the password, change a new one, something similar to the ones we use for
our banking.
If you are an SBI user, then you definitely know this password policy because SBI
bank users, we have numerous password changes on a monthly basis.
Where should I get this password policy? On the left hand side, you go to account
settings. Here you have something called as password policy. When you click on edit,
you have multiple approaches that you can set certain ground rules related to the
password.
This is the default one where minimum 8 characters has to be there. There has to be
one uppercase, one lowercase, one number and one character. There are other
features as well which doesn't expire.
You can use i t anytime, as much time as you want and other details. If you have a
custom requirement, then you can choose custom. If you decide that 8 characters is
too lengthy or it is too small, you can also make it like 15 or any number of characters.
You have a proper range which is which the minimum should be 6 and the maximum
is 128. You can also include this if you do not want an uppercase or a lowercase. You
just need a number and a symbol of whatever password that particular user is going
to create for himself.
We can set up some ground rules choosing this. You can use password expiration like
how long should that password be active. Let's say you want that password to be
active for not more than one year.
So you can choose 365 days or you want it to be active only for two months. You can
choose 60 days. Depending upon your requirement, you can change when that
password is going to expire and when he should again reset his password.
This depends from team to team in the industry standards and you have others as well
like preventing the password reuse or allowing them to change their own password.
So we have various options like this. So this allowing users to change their own
password this comes from an admin level.
When you join a team and your manager provide creates a user for you where you
can access this particular cloud and he doesn't want you to change the password and
make a misuse of this account. So probably they try to check box this also. But it
depends from team to team again.




  Page 3 of 3


So you can select as many patterns and you can just click on save changes that will
create a proper policy for your password. So this is how you can enable an additional
layer of security to your users that you have created which is either through an MFA
enabling an MFA and setting up certain password policies.


------------------------------------------------------End-----------------------------------------------------
