Right, learners, now that we have spent
some time implementing POS tagging and
named entity recognition with NLTK,
Spacey, and Flair. Let's spend some
time comparing the three and know when
to use what, right? So when comparing
NLTK, Spacey, and Flair for standard
NLP tasks like named entity recognition
NER or POS tagging, your choice
ultimately comes down to your project's
primary goal, right?
Always use the right tool for the right
job. So what can be the primary goal of
your project? Is it to learn the
fundamentals or teach the fundamentals,
right? Is it to deploy a fast
production system, right? Or is it to
achieve absolute maximum accuracy on
your text data, right? So now let's
break down these three libraries
individually. Let's start with the most
traditional NLP library called NLTK.
NLTK or Natural Language Toolit is
primarily an academic and education
tool, right? That's the primary use
case for NLP. It is excellent for
understanding granular mechanics of NLP,
but it shows its age when applied to
modern large scale problems, right? So
when compared to the results of modern
applications and modern NLP models. In
modern use cases, NLP usually falls
short, right? What is the methodology?
NLTK uses a traditional modular and
manual pipeline approach. For example,
to perform NER, first tokenize the text,
then apply POS tagging, then finally
use a chunker for the named entities.
Of your tax data, right? Which in
itself was not so great, right? We, we
already saw that. What's the
performance like? NLTK relies heavily
on classical machine learning and rule
based systems.
Rather than modern deep learning.
Systems. Also, NLTK is generally slower
and less accurate.
It is best for learning the fundamental
building blocks of natural language
processing.
Or for research or for small scale
non-production projects, right? It is
great for building a POC, but when you
would want to take that POC to a
production environment or create a
microservice for your existing
application, you might need to explore
a different library for that
application, right? Which brings us to
Spacey, which is the workhorse.
Spacey is the industry standard for
high performance production ready
application, right? I always harp on
Spacey because I have myself used
Spacey in so many applications, right?
If you need to process massive amounts
of text quickly and reliably, Spacey is
your go to choice, right? How does it
work? Spacey utilises an incredibly
efficient transition-based system.
Powered by a shallow feed forward
neural network, right? I hope you
understand the difference between
shallow neural network and a deep
neural network, right?
Spacey uses Bloom embeddings to
efficiently capture the context of
words, right? So it not only captures
the word itself, but it also captures
the context of that word, right, more
on embeddings and contextual embeddings
in one of the future modules. But for
now you can understand that embeddings
or word embeddings are nothing but a
transformed version of your text data
so that the machine can understand it,
right?
OK. What is the performance like? It is
significantly faster than both NLTK and
Flair. It is the fastest, fastest out
there.
While it might drop a fraction of 1% in
accuracy compared to the heaviest deep
learning models and also compared to
Flair, right? Species speed makes it
the most practical choice for large
scale data sets. It's super fast and
it's super practical.
Key feature Spay includes displayy,
right? We already saw displayy, a
built-in visualizer that renders
beautiful color-coded NER tags, US
dependency, syntax depend dependency
trees directly in your browser or
Jupiter notebooks. So if you need
Visual description of your text
processing, you can also use Displayy
for that, right? Now, let's come to
Flair, which is the perfectionist. OK.
Flair is a powerful modern framework
built on Pytorch. What is Pytorch?
Pytorch is a very popular and powerful
framework for building large scale
neural network architectures.
Flair sacrifices raw processing speed,
right? It sacrifices on speed to focus
on achieving state of the art accuracy,
right? So there's a trade-off between
speed or implementation speed and
accuracy, and Flair chooses the latter.
How does it work? Flare leverages a
complex bi LSTM CRF neural network
architecture, right? A variant of the
popular LSTM neural network
architecture, combined with unique
flare embeddings, which are contextual
string embeddings, right? Again, more
on contextual embedding, static
embeddings in a future module, right?
For now, just understand that these
word embeddings also capture the
context of a word, right?
This allows the model to deeply
understand the meaning of a word based
on the specific text surrounding it.
Handling things like polysemy
exceptionally well. What was polysemy,
we already discussed it. These are
words that have different meanings in
different settings, right?
What is the performance like? Flair
consistently achieves higher accuracy
in F1 scores than Pacey as well on
standard NLP benchmarks.
However, because its architecture is
heavier, it is noticeably slower to run,
right? We also experienced that.
Claire is best for academic research,
highly specialised domains like medical
or legal text, and applications where
squeezing out the maximum accuracy is
more critical than processing speed,
right? So Flare is great when you need
more accuracy and you don't, you have
some time to spare, right? Let's now
compare the three and summarise our
observations. So NLTK, the primary use
is for learning and fundamental NLP
jobs. SpaceC, the primary use is for
production applications and industrial
applications. Flair offers state of the
art accuracy, right? What is the speed
like or execution time? So NLTK is the
slowest. Spacey is superfast, Flare
somewhere in the middle, right?
Architecture, NLTK follows a rule-based
and classical ML pipelines as part of
its architecture. Spacey follows a
transition-based neural network, and
Flare follows a BLSTM CRF.
How easy are they to use? So NLTK has a
manual pipeline approach, right? It has
multiple steps in its in its
application. Spacey is very
user-friendly and has a very
streamlined API and Flair, probably the
easiest. You just import the sentence
for text-reprocessing and import the
model and just apply the model, right?
Finally,
If you're building an application to
process millions of tweets in real time,
right? This is an example to just give
you the scale. Spacey is your best bet.
If you're trying to squeeze every drop
of accuracy out of a critical data set,
and have the compute time to spare,
right, you can go with flair. Wow, that
was Raymond, right? OK. Finally, NLTK
should be used as a backup only. If all
else fails, you can always rely on NLTK,
right? So that was it for this video. I
hope you gained a deeper understanding
when we compared the three side by side,
right? So that's it for this video.
I'll see you in the next one. Thank you.
