So, before we move forward, I want to
pause for 2 minutes and um want to talk
about why hugging face matters so much
in today's AI world. Like I mentioned,
think of hugging face as the GitHub of
AI models, just like uh GitHub changed
how software is built and shared.
Hugging face changed how AI models are
created. How it can be shared, how it
can be tested, or how it can be
improved.
If we just go 2 years back, building AI
was limited to big companies with
massive resources, right? If you wanted
a language model, you had to build
everything from scratch. Like data, you
have to work upon data preparation,
then training pipeline, then
infrastructure, lots of GPUs, right?
But today's hugging face has
democratised AI with a few lines of
code. Even if you are a learner, if you
are someone from a startup, or even if
you are from a big organisation, or you
are a researcher, can basically
download Whiteglass models, right? They
can run an experiment. We can fine tune
models on custom data. Because all the
quotes are available on hugging face.
All the reference documents are
available over there, right? And we can
also deploy them into real application.
Even we have the playground to test any
models. Even people are fine-tuning it
on their domain-specific data, and
those models are also available, so we
can easily go on the playground and
test those models. Now, this is very
powerful, right? So, hugging Face is
not just a website, it is an AI
ecosystem. A model hub where thousands
of models live. A dataset hub for real
world data. And of course, it's an
open-source library like uh Transformer,
uh, datasets, and Accelerate. These
libraries, anyway, we are gonna see in
the uh upcoming labs, but yeah, these
are very important uh libraries.
And global community improving models
every single day. So, we are getting
every day. Uh, lots of new models,
right, for experiment. So, what's
important for you as a learner is this,
you don't need to reinvent the wheel to
learn AI.
You have to stand on the shoulders of
the best researcher in the world. Most
modern AI research or even startup, or
even large companies, including what we
do in industry, uh, uh, in my
organisation, we use hugging face as
the foundation. So when you learn
hugging face, you are not just learning
a tool, you are basically learning how
modern AI is actually built in the real
world, right? And uh if you just master
this ecosystem, you are no longer just
a student experimenting. You become
someone who can build, basically adapt,
and ship AI solutions. So that's why
Hanging Face is the most-known platform
for anyone serious about AI today.
And also one important thing I want to
clarify right now, we will be
revisiting this hugging face website
many times throughout this curriculum,
so please don't feel stressed or
overwhelmed if everything doesn't make
sense at once. You're not expected to
master hugging face in one day or one
lab. This course is designed in a way
that you will see the same platform
again and again, and each time we, we
will focus on one small components and
uh with every labs, your understanding
will naturally improve.
Right? If you simply follow the lab's,
uh, experiments step by step, practise
what we do in the session, and explore
a little on your own, you will
automatically become comfortable with,
uh, uh, all the models, uh, data set,
how tokens work, inferencing and script,
how to do fine-tuning. Everything is
available on the website.
So, yeah, the overall hugging phase
ecosystem, you'll learn. So, take it
step by step, just uh trust the process.
By the end of this curriculum, hugging
phase will feel uh familiar, not
confusing. So, yeah, that's our goal.
OK. So now, let's come back to our
Jupiter notebook, just to quickly
recall what we decided earlier. Uh, and
our use case for this lab is very
simple. We want to build a simple basic
assistant that can generate short and
helpful responses, right? And uh, so
far, we understood what hugging face is,
why it matters, and how the ecosystem
works. Now, let's do the first, uh,
practical step. Let's download a
hugging face model for text generation.
Like we have this philtre, you can go
and explore these philtres. You can
click on
this. We want uh text generation model,
and as you see, hugging face has many,
very big models, and they are powerful.
But for this first lab, we want
something that is easy to understand,
fast to run, and can work on a normal
laptop. Or, uh, in our local system,
because I want everyone to be able to
run it without worrying about GPU or
heavy setup. So, we will pick a very
small model, a lightweight text
generation model, and today's, our goal
is not to pick the best model in the
world, but to pick a model which we can
run easily. So, I have a model in my
mind which we can try that is distil 2.
And please uh also consider using this
model from authorised vendor. So, uh,
if you're doing it by yourself, then
please use uh distilled bird. The
shorts should be distilled bird.
Now, you can see here, uh, this is the
model card. Basically, model card is uh
where you can find all information
about model, how it's trained, what was
data source has been used to train this
model. Uh, if you want to deploy this
model, you can explore this tab, but
this, we'll be covering this part later.
And if you want to use this model, so
we have multiple options uh to use it,
but we are gonna take a very simple
path. So, let's come back here. And we
will also find a tab where we can see
how to use this model inside our code.
So you can see uh this code has been
given over here and we can directly
consume it. OK. And just to give you uh
an introduction about what is digital
GPT 2, it's a small and lightweight
language model provided on hugging face.
It's a, uh, compressed version of uh
GPT 2, which means it is faster and
easier to run. And, uh, the biggest
advantage of the still GPT 2 is that it
can run on a normal laptop using CPU.
So, You don't need a GPU or any uh
special hardware. This model is not
very powerful, and it may generate uh
simple or imperfect text, but that's
exactly why it is good for uh learning.
So, it helps us focus on understanding
how text generation work, uh, learning
how to load a model from hugging face,
and seeing the full end to end workflow.
And later in the school, we'll move to
bigger and better model, but for first
lab, is still GPT 2 is a perfect
starting point.
So now, in the notebook, we will do two
things. First, we will install the
basic libraries we need, mainly
Transformers and torch. Then we
download the model and load it, and
then test it with a simple prompt.
OK. So let's see, uh, we are here,
Discover and download ML models. Since
we have already decided which model we
need to download, that is, uh, digital
GPT 2. Now, let's, uh, set up the
environment. So I have created this
requirement on TXT. Here, we have two
dependencies, transformers and torch.
So let's try to install it uh.
Uh, you know, environment. So just make
sure your environment is activated and
it will look like this.
Right. And we are inside lab one. Let's
uh just make sure. That the
requirement.txt is there and now let's
try to uh install it. Since we have
already installed UV, so let's UV
install iPhone R and then
requirement.txt. As soon as you click
this, it got installed. Uh, you can
also validate this by
Executing command like UV. OK,
last.
So this way you can see what all
libraries basically have been installed
inside your environment. So we have
installed a transformer and torch, but
these two libraries.
A dependencies of others. So that's why
you are seeing uh these many uh
installed liabilities over here. So,
yeah. So now, let's clear it. We have,
uh, configured our virtual environment.
Now, let's try to run the code. So here
we have mentioned which model we're
gonna download and uh this is the
directory where we are gonna put our
model, downloaded model. And basically
this code is just to create a directory,
uh.
This and model directory and the
subdirectory, so let's uh execute it.
As you can see, this uh directory and
then subdirectory has been created.
Now, let's try to download the model.
And uh just to give you a brief about
these two lines, so here we are
downloading two things, the tokenizer
and the model itself. We'll see this,
what's the purpose of tokenizer and
model in upcoming labs, but yeah, for
now, um, I just want to show you like,
uh, these two things we're downloading
from hugging Face. So let's execute it.
It will take some time, and you can see
all the weights are downloaded inside
this water directory.
And you can also see uh the output here.
The still 2, we have downloaded and uh
saved over here, and model saved to
this, model saved to this. So yeah, now
we have model uh on our local system.
Let's try to execute it.
So To run this, first we have to load
this model. So here is the cold. As you
see here, we are basically loading
tokenizer as well as the model. Now
let's uh load this model, and as you
can see here, we have loaded uh this
model inside uh this model object and
uh it's also saying how many parameters
this model has. So these topics anyway,
we are gonna discuss in upcoming labs.
So, but for now, we have uh these many
details. We uploaded the model,
tokenizer, uh, and uh this model has
these many parameters. Now, let's uh
try to do some kind of prediction. So
let's create a prompt. Here, prompt is
very simple. It's just a hello message
and uh model has to predict the next
token or model has to complete the
Sentence. So what we have to do first,
we need to pass this prompt inside the
tokenizer. So this text message will
get converted into tokens because model
always texts input as a token. And uh
if you see here, we are storing those
tokens inside
input. And we are passing this input
inside our model. So we are calling
model not generate. This model is the
same model which we loaded from our
local system and we are calling
generate function. And inside generate
function we have multiple parameters.
But right now the important parameter
is inputs, whatever prompt we have
created basically over here. Now?
Uh, once we get the output, we have to
again decode it. Um, again, to decode,
we have to use tokenizer.decode, and
then we'll be having our generated text.
So, let's execute this.
And you can see like model has
generated for the token, and it's
simply saying hello the first time I
saw a new version of the game, so it's
simply uh completing this. Uh, token or
the sentence. Let's try something else.
Uh, let's say machine.
Loving.
Machine learning is, let's say what,
what I will do.
And it's saying machine learning is a
great way to learn about the world. Now,
if you look at this output, uh, you
will notice that the sentence doesn't
make perfect sense, right? Uh, and
that's completely OK. The important
thing to understand here is, uh, not
the quality of the sentence. The idea
of this lab is to show that like, uh,
the model understood this is a text
completion task. It, uh, continued the
sentence based on the given input,
given prompt. And it uh basically
successfully generated text in, right?
Because we are using a very small model
and uh we gave it a very short prompt,
right? We should not expect deep or
meaningful responses. So, right now,
our focus is on how the model is loaded,
how the prompt uh is passed, and how
text is generated. And in the upcoming
labs, we will improve the prompt, uh,
we'll use better model and uh control
the output more effectively. So even if
the sentence looks simple or repetitive,
it means our pipeline is working
correctly and that's a success.
