


  Page 1 of 8


Course Video Launching & Managing EC2
Transcript
Module 5, lesson 3, practical lab. In this practical lab, I'm going to demonstrate how to
create our own EC2 instance, how to work with the security groups, how to work with
the AMIs, what are the different instance types that we can create, and how to manage
our EC2 instance. So before moving ahead, EC2 instance is just a virtual machi ne,
something similar to our personal laptops, the way our laptop has a memory RAM, we
perform certain operations like copying the files, managing the file system, working
with the softwares.
Similarly, we can do the exact same actions using our EC2 instance. The only
difference is our personal laptops, we have a physical access to it. For the EC2
instance, we don't have to manage our EC2, we don't have to manage the wiring,
configuration, setup, installation, everything.
So all of that is managed by the AWS. All we have to do is we just have to click on
certain buttons, pay some amount to what we are going to use and start using it. Now
let's get started.
So either type EC2 with a search bar or you can get it from the list. So currently I don't
have any EC2 instances running, so it is currently zero instances running within my
AWS account. So if I go to a different account, let's say I go to California avai lability
zone, we can create our EC2 instances at any region at any availability zone.
So even here I don't have any instances running. So let's try to create one instance.
At the left, you see an option called as instances and you click on it, you see an option
called as launch instance.
So we click on that, give a valid name like demo instance EC2. After providing the
name, this is where we have to select our AMI, which is Amazon machine image.
Basically, just to reiterate, AMIs are nothing but the type of operating systems.
So normally, so far we know Windows, Ubuntu and Linux. This is something that are
most common operating systems that many of our laptops have. So you can choose
anything out of this list.
If there is something that is beyond this list you're looking for, you can also browse for
more AMIs. So you have an option called as marketplace and community. So many
product based companies, when they launch their particular product with combination
of AWS, they could use this AMI, they could build their own AMI, launch their product
inside that AMI and they'll just give you the ID of whatever AMI they have launched
the product.
So when you want to use someone's product, you just browse through their AMIs and
you select it. Now, just for a simple reason, we're just going with the Linux operating



  Page 2 of 8


system and we'll go with the free tier eligible since we don't want to invite any billing.
So we have multiple free tiers within this Linux AMI.
So you can use anyone which you want. Next is the instance type. Instance type
defines what are the configurations required for your virtual machine.
So we have different types. So the free tier one is T2 micro. So we can go with the T2
micro.
But apart from that, you have multiple instance types ranging from the highest with
128 CPU, 512 GB memory. So our current one which we are selecting. So it is a
minimal one since it is on the free tier.
So we'll have only one CPU and one GB memory. You can also observe what is the
pricing based on an hourly basis. So EC2 instance works on an hourly basis.
So you have multiple options like this one for 16 GB, 32 GB, it keeps on increasing
and it changes depending upon the type that you are using. We'll go with the free tier
over here. Next is the key pair.
Key pair is something that is used to validate that a right person is trying to access this
EC2 instance. So it is kind of a required step. You can skip it.
It is not a mandatory. But when you skip it, so it is going to say not recommended
proceeding without a key pair is not recommended. So you don't have to go to
anywhere else.
You have a default hyperlink over here to create a new key pair. Give a name like key
pair for demo instance. So you can use either types .ppk or .pem whichever one is
fine.
You just create the key pair and you can save it somewhere in your desktop. Now,
after that, you have the network settings. So when you create an EC2 instance, since
it is not accessible accessible to us from a physical basis, we need to interact with it
through certain networking elements, right? That is where your VPC, subnet, IP,
firewalls, all of these come into the picture.
So over here, if you remember the security groups, which acts as a security layer for
your instance level. So we can either create a security group or we can select an
existing one. So if you select an existing one, you will have a default security group
created by AWS.
So you can use that default security group or let's create a new security group. So
here we have multiple options. The first one is allowing to connect to this instance from
anywhere.
So this is the IP address. Basically, we are trying to say that from any IP address, I
could connect to this particular instance. You can add a custom or you can add your
personal IP address also.



  Page 3 of 8



For now, we leave it as open like anyone could access this particular EC2 instance if
they have the required details. Moving ahead, we have the configuration storage. So
storage is something that will be used for your EC2 instance, like the way our laptops
have hard discs like SSD or HDD.
The EC2 instance also has a default storage, which we call it as EBS, Elastic Block
Store. We'll look into this topic in the upcoming lessons, but we can also configure and
add a storage type to our EC2. For now, we'll skip this.
So that's all. We have added all the required details. We provided a name.
We provided the AMI. What type of OS do you want to use? Then we selected an
instance type like what should be the configurations for our OS. And then we created
a key pair for security purpose so that we can connect to this EC2 instance from
anywhere.
We selected the networking settings to connect to it. And that is it. So we can also add
instances in currently we are creating only one.
You can make it as many as you want, like two, three, four, any number that you want.
So for now, we'll keep it as one. And we click on launch instance.
So within 10 seconds, your instance is up and running. See, it didn't even take five
seconds. You click on this link.
So when you go back to your instances where we started, so you'll have your instance
ready over here. So currently it is in pending state. We give it a couple of seconds.
It will be in the running state. So it is already in the running state. So this is my instance.
This is my instance ID. Every instance is going to have a unique ID so that we can
identify them based on these IDs. Right.
If the ID is not something that is easy to remember, that is where we go with the names.
So this is my instance type. This is where I have set the availability zone where I have
created my EC2 instance.
And these are all the other details. This is the key pair name that I have used for this
instance. The platform this instance is running is on Linux.
And if you go through more detail, then if you scroll down here, you have a proper
details column wherein you get to see the instance ID, public IP address of this
instance, private IP address of this instance. Basically this public IP address and
private IP address are used whenever you're trying to launch a particular product, like
you're using this instance to launch your front end. So in those cases, you can expose
this IP address so that anyone who's trying to access your website, like if you're trying
to launch an e-commerce website, right.




  Page 4 of 8


And you can use a domain name on top of this public address, public IP address. So
these are used in those cases. That's the reason we have them out in the open.
We have more additional details, which we are going to see in the upcoming modules
slowly one by one. You have the AMI ID. So this AMI ID is going to be useful, especially
when we use tools like Terraform, Pulumi or CloudFormation.
So these are tools which are used to build your infrastructure with the help of a code.
So we'll also navigate through Terraform as well as part of our last module in this
programme. So we'll discuss all of this once again, just giving you a heads up that you
have all the required details related to your instance over here.
If you are set up any alarms, you can watch them over here, like how the instance is
running. Is it up? Is it down? You can monitor your instance CPU utilisation, how the
network is working. You can have different metrics to adjust and compare how your
instance is being used.
Is it overused? Is it underused? Because if it is underused, you can just go to a
previous lower version, a lower instance type that will save you some money. If it is
overused, then you have to increase it so that your performance stays up to the mark.
So you can filter it out by different time frames.
You can use a local time zone as well. Pretty much monitoring is very much convenient
for each EC2 instance. You just have to select which EC2 instance that you want.
You select and the details of that instance will pop. Same goes with the security and
networking. What security group you are using inside the security group? What are
the inbound rules? What are the outbound rules? If you remember inbound rules and
outbound rules, decide what type of a request is allowed and what type of a request
is not allowed.
So here you can use if I go to this security group, you can also edit the inbound rules.
Like if you go to the edit inbound. So you have multiple types of connections which
you can access or which you can restrict.
You can add more rules like if you want a TCP connection with some different port or
if you want some other custom protocol that your company is using. So you can just
configure them and click on save rules. This will directly apply instantly on top of your
instance.
So all of this will help to provide a better security to your instance. Now that we are
ready with our EC2 instance, we have learned how to create our instance, how to
launch it, what all configurations to use along the way. Let's try to connect to this EC2
instance.
Now you see a button over here which says connect. We click on it. We have two
common approaches when we want to connect with this instance.




  Page 5 of 8


The first one is this EC2 instance connect. So when you click on connect, it will open,
you're able to connect to your instance through a browser. So it opens into a new tab
and from here you can access your EC2 instance.
So this is just like a command line interface where you can access your EC2. You can
do any type of operations that you do on your local laptops. Let's say if you want to
create a folder.
So the command we use is MKDIR. If you are familiar with Linux, then this would be
easier for you. So let's say I'm trying to create a folder called as bits.
I click on LS to display what all folders do we have. So currently I have only one folder.
All right.
So I want to navigate inside this folder and create a simple file. So I'll say cd bits. This
is the command that we use to change our folder cds change directory.
So now I'm inside my bits folder and if I want to create a command, I'd say create a
file touch CSP plan. Basically I'm trying to create up a learning plan for our programme.
So I'll create this file.
So if I click on LS, then this file is created. So you can do any operations. You can add
files, remove files, delete, modify, archive, unzip every operation that you do on your
local laptops.
Everything can be done within this. The only difference is since it is a Linux operating
system, Linux works purely on the commands. So you can use their multiple
commands that you could use to run your EC2 instance.
This is approach one where you approach through a browser. The issue with this is
whenever you want to access your EC2 instance, first thing you need to log into your
AWS console, which means you need to have access to the non root username and
the password. After that, you come to your EC2 instance, you type it, you look for the
relevant EC2 instance, then you click on connect, you choose the type and then you
land over here.
This is approach one, which is kind of a lengthy process. We also have an easy
approach, which is SSH client, SSH stands for secure shell login, which means anyone
from any location can directly interact with this instance from their personal machine.
Now, how is it done? You just have to follow this guidelines.
Even if you are someone from a non technical background, you don't are, you're not
involved much with the Linux or working closely with the terminal. It is still an easier
approach for you. So what you're supposed to do is let's say now this is my personal
laptop, right? So if I want to access to this instance from my local laptop, so what I
have to do, I have something called as a terminal.




  Page 6 of 8


So in this terminal, currently this is my personal username, right? So over here,
whenever I want to log in from here, I need to make sure that my particular key value
pairs, which I have created, should be, I need to go inside that folder and from there I
will be logging in to my EC2 instance. Now, so I have my key value pair, which I have
downloaded to launch my EC2 instance. It was on the desktop.
So I have to, since I'm in my root account, so I'll just go to change my directory, the
desktop and see if it is present or not. Okay. So this was the key pair that I have used,
right? So I'm in my right folder.
Now from here, we need to run a couple of commands to directly connect to our EC2
instance from my local machine. Now how do we do that? So we have a proper
guidance, like first we open our terminal, such client is nothing but a CLI where you
are going to run the commands. So from here, we have to locate where our key pair
was present.
So as I've already shown you, it is in my desktop. So I have changed my directory
using the cd command from the root directory to the desktop folder. After that, we need
to run two commands.
So the first one is this one, so that our file, our key value files are accessible. This is a
command that we use to make our files accessible to anyone. After that, so it is asking
us to connect to our instance using a public DNS.
So you can skip step four and you can directly copy this command over here, the
example command. So the format of this command is ssh -i, the name of your key
value pair and the ARN of your EC2 instance. So if you see this EC2 at the rate EC2
1356 to 12, this is exactly the same which we have launched.
This is the username of our EC2 instance. Just like I have this as my username,
similarly, my remote has this as its username. So all we're trying to do is just using
replacing the names and running this command.
So just copy this and run it in your terminal or in your command prompt. So it's going
to ask you for a confirmation if you want to continue connecting to this remote server.
So I say yes, that's it.
So if you observe over here, so this was my local account for my laptop and this is my
remote EC2 instance, which means currently I'm inside my remote EC2 instance. So
if you remember, we created a folder called as bits. Right.
So if I click on LS over here, so it's going to show that directory. If I go inside this bits
and click on LS again, it's going to show the file which we created. So what you're
trying to do is you run two commands and you are able to access your EC2 insta nce
instantly.




  Page 7 of 8


Whatever files are present, everything will replicate in your local laptop. This will avoid
a lot of time for you. You don't have to collect the details, the login details, password,
type in EC2 and then click on connect and use it from the browser.
This will hardly take you five seconds to type in the command and run them. And that's
it. You have access to your EC2.
Sitting from your home, you're trying to access a virtual machine which is somewhere
in the US. Right. This is the beauty of cloud.
This is why many companies have opted for cloud compute, because it gives you an
easier approach to interact with your servers, maintain it and manage it. Now coming
to the last part of our practical lab, we have a couple of states when it comes to running
your instance. Currently it is in running state, which means my bill is going to come
based on this usage that I have done.
Right. So if you go to this instance type, we have three different stages. Stop.
Start. Reboot. And terminate.
So you'll be able to see the start instance when your instance is in stop state. So
currently it is already running. So the start is not visible.
So we have stop. Stopping an instance will only stop the processing. The billing will
still continue.
So make sure that whenever you create an EC2 instance for a practical learning, make
sure that you terminate it rather than stopping an instance. Because even though you
stop it, it is still under your name. It is still accessed and applied to your account.
So no one is still going to use this instance until you delete it. Right. So it is still on
your name.
So you have to delete to avoid any billing. Right. So we are going to terminate this to
avoid any billing.
So it is already shutting down. So once I give it like 10 or 20 seconds, it will the stage
will turn as terminated for this instance. In the meantime, let me walk you through other
options that we have.
So for an instance, you have a proper AMI catalogue where you can search or browse
for the instance images, whether it is on the marketplace or any other AMIs. You can
create your own personal AMIs. You have security groups.
You can create your key value pairs from here as well. Key value pairs and the security
groups. But when you create an instance, you already have a proper hyperlink over
there to create instantly.



  Page 8 of 8


Right. So all of this, we have reserved instances where we can we will learn about
this, which will help us in terms of getting a better pricing model, savings plan, spot
requests. So all of these are dedicated hosts.
All of this help us to track everything related to your EC2 instance from a single place.
Right. So as you can see, my instance is now terminated.
So I do not have any running instances. If we go to this running, I do not have any
instances running. Right.
So just to be on the safer side, I would recommend you guys to go to the billing and
cost management. And from here, you can verify if any services are running or any
particular service is charging any bill for you. Right.
You can also look this up within your EC2 dashboard also. And you go to the
dashboard. If you see security groups and key pairs are not there, they are not
chargeable.
You don't charge anything. So here I see there is one instance running. So it is
terminated.
Even that instance in a couple of minutes, it will be refreshed. Right. So this is how
you create your instance.
You set the configurations, you manage them. And you maintain in this way. This is
how you set up your EC2 instance and connect to it from anywhere.
That's all.
            ---------------------------------THANK YOU--------------------------------------
