


  Page 1 of 1


What is EBS? Volume types Transcript
In this lesson, we are going to understand Amazon EBS which stands for Elastic Block
Store. The simple way to think about EBS is ECS is the computer and EBS is the hard
disc attached to it. Without EBS, an EC2 instance has no reliable place to store data
for a long term.
EBS exists because applications need storage that survives reboot, failure and
maintenance events. As we were discussing in the last video, when an EC2 instance
restarts, the data on the EBS will still be there. That's why almost every EC2 instance
you create will use EBS in some form.
Now, EBS isn't just one type of storage. AWS gives us multiple volume types so we
can match storage to the workload. The most commonly used option is GP3, the
general purpose SSD.
It provides a good balance of cost and performance and it works well for web servers,
applications and development environments as well. If you are unsure which type of
volume to use, GP3 is usually the safest choice. For workloads that need very high
performance, especially databases, AWS provides IO1 and IO2 volumes.
These allow you to pre-define how much performance you need. So you pay more but
you get consistent speed and very low latency. IO2 is the newer and more durable
option for large files that are read and written sequentially like logs or analytics data.
ST1 is a better choice. It is cheaper than SSD but not designed for database or boot
volumes. So SE1 is the lowest cost option.
It is meant for data that is rarely accessed like old logs or archives. It is slow but very
cheap. A good way to remember this is by thinking about storage in daily life.
You wouldn't store important work files on a slow old USB drive and you wouldn't buy
enterprise-grade storage for casual use. So choosing the right EBS volume helps you
avoid performance issues and unnecessary cloud bills. In the next topic, we'll continue
building on storage by looking at concepts like snapshots, backups and restore
strategies.


------------------------------------------------------End-----------------------------------------------------
