


  Page 1 of 3


Attaching/detaching EBS volumes Transcript

In this demonstration, we are going to understand and practically observe how the
EBS volumes work and how to attach them to our EC2 instance. So a quick summary,
EC2 instance is just a compute, a virtual machine and EBS is a persistent disc that
can be attached to your instance. So EBS has no value if it is not attached to an EC2
instance.

Just the way our laptops have hard disc, EC2 instances use EBS elastic block store.
The only difference over here is EC2 can be stopped or terminated but EBS volumes
can exist independently. You don't have to mandatorily have an instance to create an
EBS volume.

So if you go back over here, so within the EBS, when you go to the volumes, you can
create any kind of a volume with various options. So let's go through this step now. So
as discussed earlier in the previous videos, so you can have multiple types of volumes
according to your use case.

If you want a general-purpose GP2, GP3, you want a cold HDD which is not that much
used or you want a standard volume type, whichever one you want, you can choose
the desired volume type. Then a proper size, let's say I want it like 50. A 50 GB should
be the size and availability zone is something very important when it comes to creating
your own volumes.

EBS volumes are availability zone scoped which means wherever your EC2 instance
is present in whichever availability zone, if you want to attach this new volume to that
particular instance, the availability zone should match. So our EC2 instance which we
created in the practical lab, so it was in US East 1C. This is the availability zone which
is where the instance is created.

So if we want to attach this volume as a storage, we have to create the volume in the
same availability zone. You can create snapshot IDs if you want or you can use some
existing templates. For now, we will ignore it and we'll just directly try to create a
volume.

So this standard type is our volume that we have created. Let's give it a name demo
EC2 volume. So this is our volume which we set it for standard type 50 GB and the
availability zone is US East 1C.

Now remember this one which is GP3 8 GB. If we go back to our instance and this is
our instance. If you go to the storage type, we already have and we always have a
default EBS storage.




  Page 2 of 3


If you look at this, so this is our default EBS storage. So the volume is 8 GB. This is
the volume ID.

It is actively in use for this particular instance. Whatever activities you do that require
a proper storage, this particular storage option is used. So this is exactly the storage
which we are using at the moment.

Now if you want to add an additional storage, the one which we created over here. So
we can add our storage accordingly. So how we do is you go to your EC2 instance,
go to actions.

In this, within the storage, you choose attach volume. So when you choose the volume
that you created. So this was the volume which we created few minutes ago.

Demo EC2 volume. So it is visible over here because it is in the same availability zone.
If it was in a different availability zone than US East 1, it would not have been visible
over here.

So you need to be very sure before creating your volume. So when we attach it,
choose a device name. So after you create a volume, you also have to mount your
storage to your EC2 for all the obvious reasons.

So let's say I choose this one and attach a volume. Now if I go back to the storage,
now I have two EC2 instances. Sorry, I have two EBS volumes attached to my EC2
instance.

Both of them aren't attached. So if either of them, I can detach them anytime I want.
So all I have to do is go back to my volumes.

And if I feel that this is an additional one, I do not want this much of a higher capacity.
I'm just paying for something I'm not even using. So all I have to do, go to the actions
and I can just say delete.

It's asking me to type delete. So I'll just copy paste to save some time. So in order to
avoid deleting a particular volume mistakenly, AWS helps us to pause it and verify
what and why we are deleting it.

So if I go back to my EC2 instance over here and I go to storage, I have an option
called as detach volume. The way we have attached our existing new volume, we can
also detach it. After detaching the volume, then we can delete it completely.

So here I'm going to choose which one I want to detach. So the one which we created
with the 50 GB, I want to detach this and I select detach. So once I refresh it, I'd again
see only the default volume.



  Page 3 of 3



Now if I go back to my volumes over here, so despite detaching, I still have my EBS
volume present. As I mentioned earlier, volumes are independent of EC2 instances.
Their value increases when they are attached to an EC2, but that does not mean that
if you detach a volume from an EC2, your volumes will automatically be deleted.

That is not the case. If I try to, since I'm not using it anywhere, it is not attached to any
particular EC2 instance, I can just delete the EC2 instance from here. So now my EC2
instance got deleted.

Reason being, it wasn't attached to any EC2 instance. The key points to remember
from this demonstration is EBS volumes are availability zone specific. To whichever
EC2 instance you are trying to attach it, you need to make sure that you have to use
the exactly the same availability zone while creating your EBS volumes.



------------------------------------------------------End-----------------------------------------------------
