Hello to all of you. My name is Dr. Hemant Rathar and we are in the course Machine Learning. Today,
we are going to start with a new module, module 12, which will focus on two algorithms, BBscan
and Birch. So this video will focus on density based clustering and db scan algorithm. So the learning
objective of this video are, first we will explain the motivation behind density based clustering,
then we will look into the two key parameters of db scan which is EPS and min points, then we will
look into the differentiation between three types of points in db scan which is core, border and noise
and finally we will look into the core concepts of db scan which is density reachability and density
connectivity. So let's start right away. Right, so in the last couple of modules we looked into two
different clustering algorithms. First we discussed k-means clustering algorithm and later we discussed
hierarchical clustering algorithm. If we look very careful at k-means clustering algorithm,
the advantages are that it is extremely fast and it is very simple to run and understand. However,
the limitations of k-means are it cannot detect, it will fail to detect non-globular clusters. Right,
so it is a center-based clustering algorithm. So it can easily detect spherical clusters,
but non-globular clusters it cannot detect. Plus, it is sensitive to outliers. So if there are outliers in
the dataset, k-means will start behaving poorly. On the other hand, if you look into the hierarchical clustering,
right, hierarchical clustering create a hierarchical structure, right, which we can sort of understand
and cut at various levels of abstraction to get the desired clusters. However, it is very expensive to
construct. Right, so if you remember, the complexity of hierarchical clustering is many a times n-cube, which is extremely high. Plus, it is
biased towards the linkage choice which we are using to define the inter-cluster similarity.
Now, so can we sort of design a new philosophy of clustering algorithms that can handle complex shapes as well as noise. Right, so this is what we want to do.
We want to have a different philosophy behind a different philosophy behind a new clustering algorithm, which can detect complex shapes
and noisy points. Right, so that is why we have something called a density-based approach. Right, so if you remember, let me draw a very simple diagram.
Now, if I ask you what are the two natural clusters in this data set, it would look something like this. One and two. These would be the two natural clusters in the data set.
Any clustering algorithm, whatever we are trying to use, be it k-means or hierarchical or dbscan should be able to detect these clusters.
Now, as you can understand, if I run k-means on this, most likely k-means will not be able to detect these natural clusters.
Because it is a center-based clustering algorithm, it will identify two centroids and then build a cluster around it. So you will get these two clusters, which are not natural clusters. So it will not give you error.
k-means will not give you error. It will give you improper clusters. Same story with hierarchical clustering. So can we sort of change the philosophy here and sort of do clustering based on something called density. Right.
So instead of grouping points based on distance or center, k-means is a center-based clustering algorithm and it is also measuring similarity based on distance. So can we just hold these two philosophies for a while and can now we book or group the clusters based on a new philosophy which is called density. So what is density? Right. Let's talk about what is density. So when we are saying a region is dense, right, what essentially we are meaning?
What essentially we want to point out. We are saying that in a given radius, the number of points are high, right? So when we say a city is dense, that means in a given area, the number of people living are very high. Similarly, when we say a area or a city is less dense, that means in a given area, the number of people living are very less, right? This is what we mean by density. The same philosophy we will hold for density based approach as well. So what is the intuition behind density based approach?
A cluster is a cluster is a dense region of points in a vector space, right? This is what I was saying. A cluster is a dense region of point in the vector space. A cluster is a dense region of point in a vector space. Can you visualize what I am trying to point out? So that is why density based clustering might work here.
Additionally, clusters are separated from one another by region of low density area. This is the low density area. So why C1 and C2 are not same cluster? Because there is a low density area sitting in the middle.
So this approach which is density based approach basically can detect clusters of various shapes and sizes plus it can handle noise as well. So let's look into more details of it, right? So density is a philosophy. One of the very popular algorithm which follows density based approach is called as DB scan. It is one of the most popular density based clustering algorithm. The full form of DB scan is
density based spatial clustering of applications with noise is called as DB scan. It is one of the most popular density based clustering algorithm available today. It can detect clusters of arbitrary shape, width, and it can handle noisy points as well.
Unlike K means where we have to pass the value of K a priori before running the algorithm, we do not have to do anything like that with DB scan. DB scan can automatically detect natural clusters in the dataset.
Now, so there are two key parameters as we were talking about earlier. When I say an area is dense, we are talking about in a given space how many points are there, right? So in the context of DB scan or density based clustering, how do we actually quantify this density? It is done using two parameters, EPS and min points. EPS and min points. Right? So let's try to understand it in a very simple term.
Let's suppose A is a point, right? I want to check whether A is in the dense area or not. To identify whether it is in a dense region or not, first we have to build a region around it, right? First we have to define the region around it. So how do I define region? I define with a parameter called EPS. So what do you mean by EPS? EPS is essentially the radius, right, of a circle, right?
So this will define area around that point, right? So around A, I will take radius EPS and draw a circle around it. So this will define area around the point, right? So once the area is defined, now what I have to measure, I want to measure how many points, minimum number of points should be there, so that I can call A, I can say that A is in a dense area, right? So let's suppose I say,
min point, min point, min point, min point, min point, I define min point, so min point, let's suppose I say 5. So min point is essentially minimum number of points that requires within a given point EPS radius to be considered as dense region.
So basically what we are trying to say is, A is a point to quantify the area, to fix the area, we draw a circle around it with a radius of EPS. And then we define min points. If there are 5 points, for example, in this case, min point equals to 5, if there are 5 points in the area around A, defined area around A, then we can say that A is in the dense region.
So let's count 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So the number of points in the area around A is 6. And we have defined a threshold saying that if there are more than 5 points in the vicinity of A, then we can call A, then we can say that A is in a dense region, right?
So these two parameters can help us in defining dense area for a given problem statement. So I hope you got it, right? So it's a density based clustering algorithm. To define density, we have two parameters, right?
EPS, which help us in defining the area around our given point and min point, which talks about the minimum number of points that should be there in the vicinity to call it a dense region, right?
Now, so very simple density we have understood. Now, once we have understood how do we define density, let's try to quantify, define points into one of the three categories.
So in density based clustering algorithms, particularly DB scan, each point will fall under one of the three exclusive groups, right? Will be categorized as either core point or border point or noise point or outline.
So in DB scan algorithm, given a dataset, we will label each point as either core point or border point or noise point, right? So what is a core point? Core point is at the heart of dense region, right? What is border point? Border point is at the edge of dense region. And what is a noise point? Noise point in a very sparse region, not belonging to any cluster.
These are very broad definitions. I will explain the basic definition as we move ahead. So when we run DB scan, we first actually label each point as either core or border or outlier or noise point. So what is a core point? What is the basic definition of core point? Is a point is a core point. If it satisfies the min point criteria in a given EPS. A point is a core point. If it satisfies the min point criteria in a given EPS.
A point is a core point. If it satisfies the min point criteria in a given EPS. So let's take a very simple example. Let's try to understand point A. So this is point A. Now I want to check whether A is a core point or not. Let me define EPS. Let's suppose I say EPS equals to 2 cm. And min point as let's suppose 5.
So to check whether A is a core point or not. So to check whether A is a core point or not. Right. A falls under a dense region or not. Right. What we have to do? We have to first draw a circle around A with a radius or with a EPS of 2 cm. Right. Like this.
So let's count the number of points. So let's count the number of points. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. So A satisfies the min point criteria in a given EPS. So we can call A as a core point. So in a given EPS. If the number of points are equal to min point or greater than min point. We can call that point as core point.
Now what is a border point. Now what is a border point? Again let's take the same example. We have EPS as 2 cm. And min point as 5. Let's talk about this point B. Right. Let's talk about this point B. Right. We want to check whether B is a border point or not.
So before border point or not. So before border point or not. Let's check B is a core point or not. Right. So when I want to check B is a core point or not. What I have to do? Right. I have to first draw a circle around it with a EPS of 2 cm. Right. I want to check whether B is a core point or not.
I am first checking B is a core point or not. To do that what I have to do? First I have to draw a circle around it with a EPS of 2 cm.
Then I have to count the number of points in this given region. Right. So the number of points in this given region are 1, 2 and 3.
So it does not satisfy the min point criteria for core point. Right. To call B as a core point in a given EPS. It should satisfy the min point criteria. A was satisfying the min point criteria. B is not satisfying the min point criteria.
So we can call B as a border point if it satisfies the min point criteria in a given EPS and the point comes under the neighborhood of a core point. So when we can call a point as a border point if it does not satisfy the min point criteria plus it falls under a vicinity of core point.
So what are the points in the vicinity of B? 1, 2 and 3. These are the 3 points in the vicinity of B. Is any of these points core point? Yes. A is a core point.
So that is why we are saying that B is a border point. Right. Why? Because B does not satisfy the min point criteria plus it falls under a vicinity of a core point. And the core point here is A. Minimum one core point. That is what we are trying to say.
So border points are essentially the border of a cluster. Right. They might not be part of dense region. But they are at the end of the cluster. Just hold this thought. We will show you very good examples to visualize this.
But let's try to understand the definition of core, border and noise point. So noise point or outlier point. What is the definition? Right.
So let's talk about this point C. Right. When can I say a point is a noise point? So first try to understand, check whether C is a core point or not. Right.
So to check C is a core point or not. What I have to do? I have to draw a radius. So same parameter. EPS of 2 cm and min point of 5.
So first I have to do a circle around C with a EPS of 2 cm and count the number of points. Right.
So C is not a core point. Right. So C is not a core point. Why? Because it does not satisfy the min point criteria. So what are the number of points in this region? 1, 2.
There are only 2 points in the region. And to call C as a core point, the minimum number of points should be 5. So C is definitely not a core point. Why? Because the number of points in the vicinity of C are only 2.
So C is not a core point. Is C a border point? Let's check that. So C is a border point if it does not satisfy the min point criteria. But in the vicinity of C, there is a core point. So how many points are there? 1 and 2.
Is 1 or 2 a core point? Both of them are not a core point. Why? How do we know that? We have to draw a certain and then count. You can do it as a homework.
So C is not a homework. But both 1 and 2 are not core points. So therefore, C will also not be a border point. C would be a noise point. Right. So when we can call a point as a noise point or a outlier. A noise point has does not satisfy the min point criteria in a given EPS. And it cannot be reached from any of the core point. Then we are calling it as a noise point. Right. Noise points are low.
Are low density regions that are not even close to dense region. Right. And that is why DB scan is so popular because it can automatically detect outliers in the data set or noisy point in the data set by just definition.
Now let's take a couple of examples to understand this further. Let's take a couple of examples to further sort of strengthen our idea of core, border and outlier points. Right. So given this sort of example, let me define EPS as now 1 centimeter.
And min point. And min point. As min point. As min point. As min points at 4. Right. So I have defined EPS. I have defined min points. Now I want to check whether this point A. Is a core point or not. So how do I do that? I will first draw a circle around it.
So how do I do that? I will first draw a circle around it. So let me define EPS with an EPS of 1 centimeter. And then count number of points in the region. Number of points are 1, 2, 3, 4. Right. Now it satisfies the min point criteria. That is why A is a core point.
So let's talk about this point. Let's talk about this point. B. Whether B is a core point or a border point. We want to check. So when we actually start checking the points, we will first check any point whether it's a core point. It doesn't satisfy the core point. Then we check whether it's a border point. If it doesn't satisfy the border point condition, then we check whether it's a noise or not. So most likely it would be a noise because if it doesn't satisfy any of the above, the point is noise point.
So we want to check whether B is a core point or not. So what I have to do? I have to draw a circle around it with a radius of EPS with a radius of 1 centimeter. Count number of points 1, 2. So it does not. B does not satisfy the min point criteria. So B is definitely not a core point. Is it a border point? So we have to check whether the points in the vicinity of B, which is 1 and 2.
So are any of these points are a core point? Yes, A is a core point. That is why B is a border point. And what about noise? This point C. Right? So what I have to do? I have to draw a circle around it with a radius of EPS 1 centimeter and count the number of points. It does not satisfy the min point criteria. Plus it does not fall under any of the core point. That is why C is a noise point. Right? Noise points are isolated points.
And are not within the reach of any of the core point. Border points we have already discussed. Core points we have already discussed. Right? Let's take another example. This is bit more complex. But you will understand why I am discussing this in a minute. Right? Let's take the same sort of parameters.
So let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take the same sort of parameters. Let's take it now. And min points.
are essentially let's define it as 4. So let me tell you when you run db scan in sklearn. Both these parameters. EPS and min point. We have to pass it as an input parameter. Right? There is a default value for sure. But those are both EPS and min point are input parameters in db scan algorithm. Right? So I have many points here. Right? Let us label each of these points as either core or border or noise. So let's start.
with this one. Right? So what I have to do. I have to draw a circle around it with a radius of EPS and count number of points in the vicinity. Number of points are 1, 2, 3, 4. So it is a core point. Similarly, let's talk about this point. I have to first draw a circle around it and count the number of points in the vicinity. Right? So it has only one point in the vicinity. Doesn't satisfies the min point criteria. Definitely not a core point. Whether it's a border point or not. I have to check this point. Whether this point is a border point or not.
is a core point or not so draw a circle around it and then number of count the number of points in
the vicinity the number of points in vicinity are one two three four right so this is a core point
therefore it is a border point yellow one is a border point and so on so i hope you have understood
the story now once we understand that how do we define density once we have understood how to label
each point as either core or border or outlier let's define two more terminologies first is called
density reachability so what do you mean by density reachability so first let's try to sort of understand
what is reachability so let's try to define first what is direct density reachable right let's try to
sort of focus on one thing and then we'll broaden the idea so what is direct density reachable a point
p is direct density reachable from point q if q is a core point and p is within the vicinity of q so q is
a core point and p is a vicinity of neighborhood of q direct density reachability is a one-way relationship
vice versa is vice versa is not true so that means what i'm trying to say here is border points can be
reached from core point but core point cannot be reached from border point vice versa is not true
let's try to see it pictorically now right so i am saying p is direct density reachable from p1 p
is direct density reachable i am talking about this point from p1 so by definition what we have to do first we have to say check whether p1 is a core point or not so draw a circle around it of eps given eps count the main point criteria assuming p1 is a core point right so i can reach from p to p1 but the vice versa is not true i cannot reach p1 from p.
right so again the definition a point p is direct density reachable from point q if q is a core point so p1 is a core point so p1 is a core point and p is in the vicinity of q so p is the vicinity of p1 right that is why we are calling it as p is direct density reachable from p1 then we can define density reachable right so direct density reachable right so direct density reachable
let's expand this let's expand this further to density reachable that means i now can have multiple hops in the middle let me say then you understand what i am trying to point out yeah i am saying that p is density reachable from q because i can start from q which is a core point and hop between core points to reach to q
p is density reachable from q which is density reachable from q because i can start from q because i can start from a core point and hop on core points and reach the point p right that is why it is called density reachable right so point p is density reachable from a point q if there is a chain of point leading from q to p where each point is directly density reachable from q to p
from the previous one so again this is a non-symmetric relationship so again this is a non-symmetric relationship i cannot say that q is direct or q is density reachable from p i cannot say that q is direct or q is density reachable from p i cannot say that because p is not a core point i can say that p is direct is density reachable from q because q is a core point and i can hop between core points and can reach p.
d can be a density reachable from a core point but vice versa is not true so just remember this definition you will understand in the next video why we are learning these definitions right so just to give a hint this is how a cluster grows right we start from a core point follows a path or two other core points and find all the connected density point and that becomes my one cluster i start from a core point
check all the check all the check all the check all the check all the check all the check all the core points in its vicinity expand those core points in the vicinity the complete region till i find a border point becomes the part of a particular cluster just hold i will show you a very good pictorial representation of this next video then we have a new definition called new term called density connected right so what is density connected two points p and q are density connected if
there is a third point o in the middle such that p and q are density connected if there is a point sitting in the middle o right and p is density reachable from o and q is also density reachable from o what is the meaning all these are part of one cluster so from one border
to another border to another border or in the middle we have all the core points so dense area less dense area the whole part is a part of one cluster right please note down that density connected is a symmetrical relationship so this is a final piece in the puzzle it allows us to connect two border points that on the opposite side of the same dense cluster
and if we can trace back to the common core point which is connecting these two right just hold we have introduced many terminologies in this we will connect all these terminologies with db scan algorithm in the next video
so in the summary in this video we talked about the basic philosophy of density based clustering right which is essentially clustering not based on center not defining similarity based on distance it is based on density it can detect arbitrary shape clusters and can handle noise we looked into db scan definitions some important definitions like what is minpoint what is eps we also classified each point in db scan
as either core or border or border or noise point and then we looked into the two broad definitions of density connected and density reachable right in this video thank you for attending take care bye
