Hello to all of you. My name is Dr. Hemant Rathar and we are in the course Machine Learning. We are in the module 12 where we are talking about two clustering algorithms, DB scan and BIRCH. This is video 3 where we are going to talk about the need of scalability and BIRCH fundamentals. So the learning objective of this video are we will first understand why
traditional clustering algorithms like K-Means and Agglomative Hierarchal are not suitable for very large data sets. Then we will look into the core idea of summarization strategy which is used in a scalable algorithm, very popular scalable algorithm called BIRCH. Then we will look into defining the cluster feature or clustering feature which contains three component L, N, LS and SS and then we will look into
deriving of centroid and radius from the clustering feature. So let's start right away. So till now we have discussed three clustering algorithms which are very popular in the domain. K-Means clustering algorithm, DB scan clustering algorithm and Agglomative Hierarchal clustering algorithm. So these are very powerful clustering algorithms which are very popular today and used in various real world applications.
So if you look into K-Means clustering algorithms which are very popular in the domain. If you look into K-Means it is very fast but the limitation is it prefers or it can only detect spherical or globular clusters. On the other hand if you look into DB scan it can detect arbitrary shaped clusters and can handle noise very well but it struggles with varying density clusters. And the third one is called agglomative clustering which can help us in creating a very rich dendogram but time complex.
So in these three algorithms there is one big limitation. If we pass large number of data points say 1 million data points to any of these algorithms they will start behaving very poorly. Let's see why. So the previously studied algorithms which is K-Means DB scan and Agglomative Clustering algorithm have scalability issue.
So what do you mean by scalability issue. For example if I pass 1 million points data points to these algorithms they will start behaving very poorly. The performance will start degrading very fast. Why? Let's take an example of agglomerative clustering. In agglomerative clustering we actually generate a proximity matrix. An N cross N matrix.
The time complexity of this algorithm is N cube. Most popularly it is N cube. Sometimes it is N square log N as well. So let's take a case of N cube. So we are talking about 1 million cube. Right. Which is extremely slow. The algorithm would be extremely slow.
Again to store the space complexity. So you have to build a N cross N matrix. So you have 1 million rows here and 1 million columns here. Right. Now to have a memory structure which can store 1 million rows and 1 million columns again is extremely hard to build.
So what we are trying to build. So what we are trying to build. So what we are trying to point out here is agglomerative clustering algorithms with 1 million data points. Right. Will have will be very slow in terms of computation.
And will not be able to store the data set. Right. It would be computationally infeasible even with modern computers. Right. To work on this sort of a large data set. There is another problem with this. Right. Let's talk about K-means.
K-means. Even agglomerative hierarchical clustering. Are in memory clustering algorithm. In memory clustering algorithm. Why I am saying that? In memory means the whole data set should be there in the main memory to allow the algorithm to work perfectly fine. For example. Right. Think about it. If I am talking about clustering.
clustering 1 million data points. Right. K-means clustering algorithm assumes that these 1 million data points should be there into the main memory to efficiently run K-means clustering algorithm. Why this might happen? If you remember K-means 4 step algorithm. Right. Second step was cluster assignment. And third step was recomputation of centroid. So when I am talking about cluster assignment.
Think about it. What essentially we are doing. We will access a point. We will compute the distance between point and the centroid. We do it for all the points in the data set. So for example. In the loop. Right. The time complexity of K-means clustering algorithm is I into K into N into D. Right. So I. When we are talking about this I. The looping part. Right. Every time. I have to compute the distance between point.
The point and the centroid. That means all these points should be there into the main memory. Right. Otherwise the performance will start degrading. Why. Think about it. Right. This is. So my memory structure of my computer. Broadly there are two types of memory we have. We have.
Something called RAM. Which is much closer to my CPU. And then we have. Secondary storage. Which is typically disk. AGD. Right. What we are saying. In K-means is. K-means is an in memory. Clustering algorithm. That means. It assumes that. All the 1 million data points.
should be there into the main memory if that is not the case then if half of the data set is here
and half of the data set is here that will lead to too many page faults right so if i'm trying my
cpu is trying to access let's suppose 0.1 then 0.2 and then 0.3 is here 0.4 is here so first they
will access 0.1 then 0.2 and when we try to access 0.3 it will lead to a page fault that means i have
to keep these out and then bring these in this is called page fault right page fault now page fault
is a very sort of time consuming and computationally expensive exercise and there will be too many page
faults plus these page faults will happen in every iteration of k means that is why k means assumes
that the whole data should be there into the main memory so that whenever cpu wants to access any
data point it can access it very quickly if k means want to access any data point it should be able to
access it very quickly rather than getting stuck with a page fault so this is a fundamental problem
with k means and agglomative and db scan algorithm that if we pass large number of data points to
these clustering algorithm their performance will start degrading very fast so what is the solution
right we can propose we can design a new strategy which is solely to handle large amount of data set so given a large amount of data set that we cannot fit into the main memory or that is too slow to process right can we do something can we use some sort of a summarization techniques so that we can handle large amount of data right so traditional algorithm will start suffering very badly in terms of scalability and
so can we design a new algorithm can handle large amount of data so can we design a new algorithm a scalable clustering algorithm that can handle large amount of data
amount of data even if doesn't fit into the main memory and the computation is also limited.
So the name of the algorithm is called Birch. One of the proposed algorithms which is highly
scalable is called Birch. We will talk about that in a minute. It's a big part we will
discuss each detail of Birch one by one. So the basic idea of any scalable clustering
algorithm will be divided into three parts. Part one or any scalable clustering algorithm would have
these three parts. In part one with a scan so let's suppose I've been given one lakh data points
that I cannot load completely into my main memory and in one shot because of the main memory space
limitation I cannot load it into the main memory all the points at one point of time. Step number
one is my clustering algorithm will go through these one lakh points one by one. So it needs not to be
loaded in one shot into the main memory if half of that is there into the main memory. So those points
will be scanned first and then rest of the points will be scanned later. So I do a single pass of this
data set and build a compact in memory summary of these points. Right. So in pass one I will in step number one I will do a single pass over the data to build a summary. Right. Which I can fit into the main memory. So let's suppose this one lakh point I can summarize somehow with let's suppose 10k points, 10,000 points. So let's suppose this one lakh point I can summarize somehow with let's suppose 10k points, 10,000 points. So let's suppose this one lakh point I can summarize somehow with let's suppose 10k points. 10,000 points.
which can fit into the main memory. Right. Step number one we will pass we will scan the complete data set one by one. Right. Even if you are not able to load the complete data set at one shot. Once we are done with the scanning we are talking about we will have a compact in memory summary of the data which we can fit into the main memory. This is step number one. This is step number two. In step number three.
Right. We will perform final clustering with the summary. We will perform final clustering with the help of the summary combined with another pass to the data. So in step number three you will have this summary and my algorithm will go through the summary and we will do another pass to the data. Another scan to the data. Again the data need not to be loaded completely at one in one shot. I will just pass through the data. I will just scan through the data. With the help of the summary I should be able to put the points.
perfectly into the clusters. Right. So in whatever scalable clustering algorithm you are going to discuss or study in this course or in any other course this is the basic idea. Right. First step is scanning. Second step is summarization.
And third step is assigning points to proper cluster. Please note that. Right. If you look into the time complexity of Birch it is very very small. And the cost. Right. So the time complexity is very less. Because I have done this sort of optimization. But what is the cost? What is the penalty we are paying? The penalty might be that we might not always get perfect clusters. But the algorithm becomes very well scalable.
Right. So Birch or any scalable clustering algorithm will have very less time and space complexity. But the compromise would be in terms of not perfect clusters. Rough clusters are fine. Right. So this is a tradeoff which we are trying to balance. I hope you got the gist of it. Right. So the aim is to handle 1 million points or 1 lakh points. Basic algorithm cannot handle it.
So can I build an algorithm that can handle 1 lakh points. But even if they give me sort of almost approximate clusters that is also well accepted. That is the idea of any scalable clustering algorithm. So if you look into Birch which is one of the most popular scalable clustering algorithm it is divided into four phases. Four phases. Phase one. Right. Will focus on parsing the data scanning the data once.
and building a in-memory data structure which is called as cf tree clustering feature tree cf tree
right so i will so let's suppose this is 1 lakh data points right phase one will focus on just
scanning these 1 lakh points right in scanning these 1 lakh points and building a data structure
a summary of these points which is represented as cf tree which can fit into the main memory
that is phase number one phase number two which is optional will focus on sort of optimizing this cf
tree for certain reasons we'll talk about that in a minute so basically we want to check whether this
tree is skewed or not what is the height of the tree whether it is balanced or not that we do it in phase
two right so phase one is important and then phase two is optional phase three is global clustering
global clustering means now i have this cf tree i will use the traditional clustering algorithms right
the traditional clustering algorithms to find natural clusters in the data set
with cf tree with cf tree with summary so global clustering means now i have one lakh data points i
want to find natural clusters so i will not find it with original points i want to find natural clusters with
the help of this cf tree which is summary right with the help of summary not with the original points once i have identified
natural clusters in the data set i will move to phase four which is called cluster refining where i will do
another parse over these one lakh data points and assign each point to its proper cluster right to its proper cluster
so phase one is about doing a parsing and building a summary phase three would be essentially finding the natural clusters and phase four would be assigning each point to its proper cluster right this is the basic idea we will see the algorithm in detail as we move along so birch the full form of birch is balanced iterative reducing and clustering using hierarchies right
using hierarchies right the basic idea the basic philosophy of birch is to handle large amount of data so we do not expect birch to give me perfect clusters always right identify natural clusters perfectly always that is fine the idea of birch the design of birch is focused on handling large data sets where i do not have this time and memory limitation right so birch can handle huge
data sets and i do not have a huge data sets and i do not have a time and memory limitation right when i run that algorithm right so as we were discussing right birch there are three properties it first scans through the data right it does not need the whole data to be there in the main memory at once right so it's an incremental algorithm so if this is the data set right one lakh data points it need not to be there into the main memory right what i need
is i will just sort of incrementally access is i will just sort of incrementally access each data point and build a memory structure summary of these points in a something called clustering feature right so summary can be built right using that scan right scan through the whole data right and that is enough to sort of build a summary of the data set and it essentially build a hierarchical structure we will talk about what do you mean by hierarchical structure in a while now we are talking about summarizing summarizing so many
many times right so phase one essentially is talking about summarization of 1 lakh points
to let's suppose let's say 10k points right some random number 1 lakh points summarized to 10k
points that is the basic idea so how do we do that how do we achieve that now when i talk about
summarization think about it what we are trying to build in phase one is tightly coupled clusters
we are not focusing on finding natural clusters in phase one the idea is can i identify 10,000
very tightly coupled clusters why i am saying that just hold that thought why i will answer
that in a minute don't worry about it so if i have let's suppose this is my data set partial data set
so this is my tightly coupled cluster this is another tightly coupled cluster
now please note that i have many of these clusters i cannot load all these tightly coupled
clusters into the main memory in one shot so what i say is that instead of loading these 1 lakh data
points can i have these tightly coupled clusters i will put a summary of these tightly coupled clusters
clusters into the main memory summary so how i can summarize this cluster i can summarize this tightly coupled cluster and if you can visualize with the center right so instead of storing four data points i can represent this cluster with just centroid right and that would that is a good enough representation right we have better representation but that is an acceptable representation right instead of storing four data points can i just store the centroid of the cluster which essentially is a good representation right
right so instead of storing four data points can i just store the centroid of the cluster which essentially summarize the cluster in a very rough way similarly centroid of this cluster right so understand this part this is a very tightly coupled cluster it is a very small cluster all the points are very close so centroid would be a good enough representation of this tightly coupled cluster so instead of storing four data points
so instead of storing four data points here i will store one data point which is centroid this also can be represented with one data point this is what we want to do summary and these one point this one point essentially will be stored into the main memory right so these tightly coupled 10 000 tightly coupled clusters i will store into the main memory right so these tightly coupled 10 000 tightly coupled clusters i will store into the main memory right so these tightly coupled 10 000 tightly coupled clusters i will store into the main memory right so these tightly coupled 10 000 tightly coupled clusters i will store into the main memory
now my argument is that we have to identify these tightly coupled clusters but representing these tightly coupled clusters with centroid might not be the best way it is an acceptable way but might not be the best way can we have a better way to represent these tightly coupled clusters so we are saying that we can do it sort of a feature which is known as clustering feature cf clustering feature
right so i am summarizing this tightly coupled cluster and all these tightly coupled 10 000 so i had 10 so i had initially 1 lakh data points i cannot load them into the main memory so what i am doing i am sort of generating very tightly coupled clusters the number of clusters let's suppose are 10k right 10 000 so this is first cluster this is second cluster this is second cluster this is second cluster
this is third cluster and then this is 10,000th cluster right so now one thing is I can I load
these clusters into the main memory no I do not have space to load one lag data points so what I
can do here is I can sort of store the centroid but centroid is not the best way it is one of the
acceptable way so what I can do is I can represent this cluster using something called clustering
feature clustering feature essentially summarizes a tightly coupled cluster and it has a three tuple
architecture clustering feature is a three tuple architecture which contains enough statistical
information about this cluster enough statistical information about the tightly coupled cluster so
the three tuples are n number of points l linear sum and s squared sum
so let's discuss each of this one by one so what do you mean by n n is simply the number of points
there in that cluster this tightly coupled cluster so number of points so this number of points I can
count so in this case I have four points right so n value would be four my n is a single scalar value
right so let's suppose i have a cluster tightly coupled cluster which contain three points p1 p2
p3 so the n value of this cluster would be three right n would be three we have to discuss ls and
ss now right so what is ls ls is linear sum ls stands for linear sum this is a vector sum of all
the data points in the cluster just hold this thought i will show a numerical as well in a minute
right what do you mean by vector sum vector sum will help us in keeping track of the centroid of
mass of the cluster this ls will help us in keeping or identifying the center of mass of the cluster
what do you mean by center of mass if you are listening carefully if you are understanding
very carefully right essentially we are talking about centroid so with linear sum i can easily
identify the centroid of the cluster how we'll see that and then the third tomology in or third tuple
in my cf tuple clustering feature tuple is called ss squared sum stands for squared sum so what is
squared sum the squared sum the squared sum is a squaring of all the data points in the cluster and
it is a single scalar value ls is a vector value ss is a single scalar value now with ss with squared sum
what i can get what i can derive is the spread of the cluster or variance of the cluster so let's see a
toy example you'll understand in very simple it's a very simple sort of concept so let's suppose i have three points p1 p2 and p3 these points are in two dimensional space x and y right so now if p1 p2 and p3 are essentially my tightly coupled cluster one way is i can store six values right and i load this tightly coupled structure into the
main memory or i can summarize this into a smaller value which we are saying that is clustering feature cf clustering feature is a three tuple architecture n ls and ss n is number of points how many points are there three number of points in this tightly coupled cluster is three what is ls linear sum linear sum means you add x of a
each x part of each x part of or x dimension of each data point so 2 plus 3 plus 4 and y also 5 plus 2 plus 4 this is vector addition right so 2 plus 3 plus 4 gives me 9 and 5 plus 2 plus 4 gives me 11 so i get a coordinate i get a vector 9 comma 11 it's a two dimensional vector space since the original points are in two dimension and then finally we
we have squared sum squared sum squared sum squared sum squared sum means square each of these terms and add them up for example 2 plus 5 plus 3 plus 4 plus 4 square so 2 square plus 5 square plus 3 square plus 2 square plus 4 square plus 4 square when i do that i get a scalar value which is 74 here 74 so my clustering feature for this tightly coupled cluster is
3 comma 9 plus 3 comma 9 11 comma 74 this is my number of data points this is my linear sum this is my linear sum and this is my squared sum right now what is the best part here right just let me explain another very toy example if you are not able to visualize this so let's suppose we have a one dimensional data two dimensional is bit hard to visualize so one dimensional data right this is my one dimensional data i
i have three data points the values are the coordinates are the coordinates are 1 2 and 3 1 dimensional data assuming these are part of tightly coupled structure cluster right these data points into the main memory right instead of these three values can i summarize yes i can summarize with the help of clustering feature which is a three couple architecture n is number of data points 3
linear sum 1 plus 2 plus 3 linear sum 1 plus 2 plus 3 there is only one dimension so that would work 1 plus 2 plus 3 and ss is right 1 square plus 2 square plus 3 square so 1 square plus 2 square plus 3 square you get ss value right now with these three values i can derive what is the centroid of this cluster what is the radius of this cluster what is the diameter of this
cluster all those things i can derive what is the cluster all those things i can derive what is the cluster of this cluster all those things i can derive with that we will see in a while right so the best part with clustering feature is that it is additive in nature that means if you give me clustering feature of one tightly coupled cluster and clustering feature of another tightly coupled cluster i can just add the corresponding values and i can get the consolidated the combined cluster right so if we have two disjoint clusters
clusters c1 and c2 right with their own clustering feature cf1 and cf2 i can just merge them and form
a cluster 3 which is c1 union c3 which is just simply adding it component wise so n plus n ls
plus ls and ss plus ss if i do that right i will be able to get the combined cluster so this additive
property makes our computation very effective and very fast so we are talking about right we have n
we have ls and we have ss and we said that this is enough to represent the data right the tightly
coupled cluster right so i am saying that we can get centroid of the cluster with these three tuples
how centroid means center center means if i do ls by n linear sum by n i get centroid right two
dimensional data which i was talking about this is my ls term this is my n term so when i do n ls by n
right i get the centroid of the cluster the center of the cluster right so instead of representing the
center only center which might not give me the complete story i can represent it with n ls and ss
which can give me centroid and additional things centroid as well right so if you are not able to
visualize let's take this example this 1d example i am saying that i can get centroid ls by n
what is ls 6 what is n 3 2 what is the centroid of this cluster so i can get the centroid of the cluster
right i can also get the radius of the cluster what do you mean by radius of the cluster radius means the average distance of points from the center that belong so average distance of cluster points cluster member points from the centroid this can help us in finding the tightness of the cluster right how far
the average points are there from the center so now i can also calculate radius of the cluster right using n ls and ss this is how it can be done it's your homework to understand how it can be done right can i use n ls and ss to derive the radius of the cluster now if i have radius i can derive lot of additional things as well i can also find
diameter of the diameter of the radius of the radius of the cluster with n ls and ss what do you mean by diameter diameter is average pairwise point that belong to a particular cluster so if these are the data points average spread of points average pairwise distance of points can give me right diameter of the cluster right diameter as you can understand diameter right typically that is the diameter so diameter can give me the spread of the cluster this diameter can also be computed with
length l ls and ss your homework how can i derive that how i can derive d diameter with the help of n ls and ss right so when i am able to do summarization let's see the benefit of it right so power of summarization let's suppose without clustering feature if i have been given 1000 data points of 10 dimensions right so this is my tightly coupled cluster
clustering feature would be
one number here in number one number here in number of data points ls will have two numbers and ss will have two numbers and ss will again have one number so with just 12 numbers right with just 12 numbers ls would be 10 numbers right 10 dimensional vector space so with just 12 numbers i will be able to represent these 10 000 points that is the summarization we are talking about so i don't have to load these 10 000 numbers to represent this tightly coupled cluster i can represent this tightly coupled
with the cluster with the cluster with the cluster with the help of the cluster with the help of only 12 points so cf massively and efficiently compresses the cluster information into a small tuple architecture so now in the next video we will talk about how can we use this cf tree or how can we use clustering feature to build a cf tree and then look into the birch algorithm so therefore in this video we talked about why k-means and hierarchical clustering are
are not a scalable solution when we are given large huge big data set right we looked into how birch can help us in solving this problem and we looked into the core of birch which is clustering feature which is a three tuple architecture n ls and ss and with these three tuples i can derive the centroid of the cluster radius of the cluster and diameter of the cluster we will continue in the next video as well thank you for attending take care bye bye
you
