


  Page 1 of 8




     GitHub Actions Pipeline Demo Transcript
Module 12, Lesson 3, Practical Lab. In real DevOps teams, every code change is
automatically validated using pipelines. Today, we'll try to demonstrate the same and
understand how the entire flow looks like.
So we'll create a GitHub account and we'll  also set up Git in our local systems to
manage the version control for all the code changes. Post setting up Git and GitHub
accounts, we'll try to complete all the authorisation steps related to the setup and we'll
create some simple files and push the co de from our local machine, observe how
those changes are automatically reflecting into our GitHub account, which is over the
internet. We'll also try to automatically trigger a pipeline on the code changes.
In short, we are going to see how the continuous integration CI will be in action from
the beginning till the end. So first, to set up Git in your laptops, navigate to git-scm.com
slash instal. From here, you can choose your desired operating system, which ever
operating system you're using for your laptop.
Go choose that and try to follow these instructions. You can just directly click here to
instal for Windows if you're using if you're using Mac or Linux, running these
commands should be fine. So following these commands will make it easier for you to
set up your Git.
Once your Git is installed successfully, when you try to open the file and keep on
clicking next during the installation process, you will have something as git bash. Make
sure that git bash is also checkboxed. That is very important.
Post installation, open your browser and search for GitHub and sign up a GitHub
account with your email and password. After signing up, it will ask you to create an
organisation which will look something like this. So it will look you go to the
organisations like this.
You have to create an organisation for yourself. And from there, from that organisation,
you can get inside that and you can start working on projects directly. Post setup,
whatever change that we have in our local environment, if we want those changes to
reflect inside our GitHub repository, you should have a new repository set up in your
GitHub account and you should have the required authorisation between your GitHub
account and your local environment.
So let's try to first set up that authorisation between our GitHub account and then our
local environment for that. The first thing is open your if you're using Windows, then
open PowerShell, run as administrator and first run this command. Get service SSH
agent.



  Page 2 of 8



If you see something similar to this, which is in stop status, then run the following three
commands. Post that once you see that the status is running, then we can go ahead
with the next step. Make sure you follow this procedure before going ahead with
creating the SSH setup.
After this, create a simple folder in your desktop, something like this. And if you have
any code editor, you can either use IntelliJ, VS Code or any other code editor. So I'll
be using VS Code in this case.
Go to file, click on open folder and select that project which you created in the desktop.
Push selection, open terminal. And from here we are going to create SSH keys and
set up the entire authorisation between our local environment and our GitHub account,
which we have signed up over the Internet.
Now, while creating the while creating our SSH keys, make sure that this terminal that
you have, it is in your git bash. This is the reason I was informing that while installation,
your git bash should also be part of your installation. You can just click on this down
arrow, choose select default profile from here.
And if you have PowerShell or command prompt, you can just choose git bash. Once
you have git bash ready from here, we'll start running the commands to generate an
SSH key. So the command for that is SSH egen -t ed25519, just we're just following
the standard practise and you can provide any email ID that you want.
Make sure you provide an actual email ID. So this is I'm just doing it for the
demonstration. You can use any personal email ID for this and hit enter.
So you will be prompted a few questions over here. You don't need to answer anything,
just keep pressing enter. You'll see something like this.
From here, once the file is created. You can verify how the files are created, if it is
properly created or any errors are there. So I'll say ls ssh.
So these are the keys that have just been created with the command that we run. Now
the next step is we have to connect git bash to the running SSH agent. If you
remember, in the initial video, I've shown you what commands to run in your
PowerShell as an administrator.
We were trying to activate our SSH agent. Now even though we have the keys, now
we have to connect our git bash to that running agent. So for that, the command is
eval quote $ssh-agent.
So this is the command that you're supposed to run post creation. After this, we need
to add this key to that particular agent. So the command would be ssh add.




  Page 3 of 8


So we're just trying to mention this exact key over here. So you should see something
like this identity added. So this was the email which we provided initially while we are
trying to create our SSH key.
Once you see this, probably our SSH key is properly added to your agent. You can
also verify it as an additional step like this ssh add hyphen l. So the moment you see
something like this, this is a confirmation that it is properly added. Now we need to get
the actual key in order to copy paste it into our GitHub account.
So we have a command cat command that we use to display the actual key. So now
that we have our actual key, make sure that you copy the entire output from the start
till the end. Do not miss out on anything.
Copy the entire thing. And so here when we go back to this top right, we have a settings
option. Navigate to settings.
On the left on the list, you see something as SSH and GPG keys. So we go to SSH.
We create a new SSH key.
We provide GitHub credentials or any other meaningful name and just paste it directly
over here. Click on add key. Once you see that the key is successfully added, head
back to your code editor.
From here to confirm if the SSH connection is built perfectly between our local
environment and the GitHub account, which is over the Internet. The command for
that is SSH-T git at the rate github.com. This is the command that you should run to
verify if the SSH is correctly set up or not. The reason we are following each and every
step very particularly is whenever you make any code change in your local
environment for those changes to automatically reflect on your GitHub account, you
need this SSH connection.
As an alternative, we also have personal access token. So these are something that
you need to provide every time you are going to push a change. So to avoid that
recurring recurrence of providing the keys, we use SSH once.
As your SSH key is set up for one time between your system and the GitHub account,
you never have to again for any other repository or any other project. You never have
to set it up again and again. So it's a one time job.
That's the reason we are going ahead with the SSH approach. So when we hit enter,
it is going to ask you that are you sure you want this to be connected because we have
never set up this connection. So you just type in yes.
And the moment you see a similar message, your GitHub and your resource are
properly authenticated and authorised to communicate with each other. So so far, what
we have done, we have enabled SSH agent. Then we've set up git bash through which
we've created some keys and we have set up a proper connection to promote our
changes from local to GitHub.



  Page 4 of 8



Now, let's get into the actual task, which is creating some changes, creating the
repository and managing it. So if I head back to my repository. So now let's create our
first repository so that our changes are saved inside this repository or something
similar to folders that we have in our laptop.
These are used to do to manage the version control of any change that is being
modified, overwritten, deleted. All these changes, every version of your actual file will
be monitored and recorded using GitHub. That's the reason we call it as a version
control system, something which helps us track every version of your code change.
Let's create a new repository. We give a name, something similar to CICD demo, then
keep it private or public. It doesn't matter.
For now, I'm keeping it as public and we can leave the options as it is. Click on create
repository. Once you create a repository successfully, it is going to prompt you with all
the required commands that you should be doing to get your changes from local to
this remote repository.
So let's try to create a simple file and push our changes to verify if it is properly done
or not. So I'll say a simple name like app.txt. Inside this, I'll mention some random text.
So I have some assuming that this is some kind of a code and I want this particular
line of code to be version control.
This represents our application code. Now, so far, the folder which we have created
into our desktop, it is just a regular directory. For that directory to be converted as an
actual Git repository at a local level, the command that we use is git init.
So this is the command that we run. Let's rerun it once again. All right.
So now this directory is considered as a Git repository. The next step is we need to
add the remote origin, which means there are hundreds of repositories out there inside
the GitHub account. And you want to specifically mention what repository you want to
track your changes.
The command for that is git remote add origin git iterate github.com. You can also get
this command directly from here. This is the exact command which we are trying to
create, which we are trying to run. So you can copy it from here and paste it directly.
Let's run git status. OK, so as of now, we do not have any files committed. We did not
make any changes.
All we did is we just added a remote origin to our GitHub repository, indicating our Git
that this is the repository that I want my changes to be pushed when I run a git push
command. So there are certain sequence of commands that we run in order to promote
our changes from local environment to this remote repository. So let's run one by one
to make sure that we have it.




  Page 5 of 8


Before making any changes, the concept of branches is very different when it comes
to using Git on your local level. By default, our branches are considered to be a master
branch in GitHub. The default branch is always main.
So we need to either rename our branch from master to main or just create a new
branch. So we'll just use this existing command for simplicity and we'll make sure that
the branches are same. All right.
So now our origin is set, which means we have a destination in which repository we
want our changes to go. We have a proper authorisation to communicate with that
repository and sync our changes. We've also set the correct branch.
Now, the only thing left is to add these changes that we created newly and take it to
that remote repository. The command for that is git add. Git add command is used to
add the files.
This stages the changes. Basically it prepares your Git of what changes to be
committed and pushed. Once we stage the changes, the next process would be git
commit.
In git commit, we are just mentioning that these are the files that are finalised to be
promoted to my remote repository. So git commit is the command hyphen m is for a
message. You can add any message related to your commit.
So I'll say it is the initial commit, the first commit that I'm doing for this repository. Push
this. Now the only thing left is to push this changes from this local environment to our
remote repository.
We use git push command for that. So I'll say git push hyphen u origin main. Whatever
origin we have set and on the main branch, we need this changes to be pushed.
All right. So our changes have successfully been promoted into our GitHub account.
Let's verify that by refreshing the tab and observe if that file from a local is appearing
or not.
So the app.txt, this is the exact file which we had in our local environment after we ran
git add, git commit and git push. Now the changes are present in our remote repository.
This verifies that our code which is in the local is now into our repository.
Now the main part, which is the main demonstration of this practical lab is creating an
actual pipeline using GitHub actions. So GitHub actions is where we create a yaml file,
provide certain details and then we wait for that change to be triggered automatically.
So let's create this file and observe how our pipeline is automatically triggered.
So for that, I'll create a folder. There is a particular format that you should be following
for these pipelines. The first should be .github. Inside .github, you should create
another sub folder, which is workflows.




  Page 6 of 8


Inside workflows, you should have your yaml file where you actually define the entire
pipeline. So I'll say pipeline.yaml or maybe I can use a simple name like main.yaml.
So now this is where we are going to define every component of our pipeline. The first
part is the name.
What name would you want to define for your pipeline? I'll say pipeline demo. Then is
the trigger. The on trigger, we are basically trying to define how and when our pipeline
should be triggered automatically.
So all we are doing under on is define the event trigger. So let's say I want this to be
triggered when someone tries to push on the branches specifically on the main branch.
So this is what I want as a trigger.
Whenever someone tries to push any changes on the main branch, this pipeline
should automatically trigger. The next part of this is jobs. Inside jobs, we define what
procedure we want to follow.
A pipeline can contain one or more jobs. Within the job, we add a proper structure of
what we want this job to perform. So I first want this to perform a build.
But if we run this pipeline in our local environment, our laptop has an operating system.
When you want to run the same thing over GitHub actions. So this is over the Internet
and there are no specific servers that we have to configure.
So GitHub action uses its own server to run our pipeline to run the logic for our code.
So for that reason, we need to make sure that we define what operating system, what
runtime should it use to prepare this pipeline. So for this, we can use Ubuntu latest.
Next comes the steps. To make sure this job is performed, we use a sequence of steps
where we define what needs to be done. The first step of every job should always be
to verify the latest code compared to the previous version.
We call it as checkout code. So I'll say checkout, I'll name it as a checkout code. And
here I will define actions checkout at the rate v3.
So this is a default keyword which is understood by the GitHub actions. The moment
it reads this line, it will understand that the user wants me to verify the latest code
before I even do anything. Any other step post this can create another step, you can
say like run a simple command inside this.
We can run any kind of a Linux or any normal command would also work. It depends
from case to case. So let's say I just want to run an echo command saying that I want
this particular this particular sentence to be repeated as part of my logic.
This could go as complex as it goes. I'm  just trying to use a simple example to
demonstrate how a pipeline is built, how it is automatically triggered. Now, overall, we
have pretty much defined everything what we want to do, how we want the steps to
be performed and what actions are required.



  Page 7 of 8


We can click we can save this by using control S. Let's open back our terminal from
here again, the process would again be the same. Whatever changes I have made, I
want to take those changes to I'll use git add. Then I want to finalise those changes
for that.
I use git commit, so I'll add a message saying that added a CI pipeline file. Now we
have finalised the change what you want to push to your remote repository. We can
directly run git push since it is the second time and we have already tried to push one
change for the first time.
And now git knows the destination. So we don't have to use the exact same command,
which is git push hyphen u origin main. Since it is for the second time, we can just run
git push and a pipeline file will be reflected into our GitHub account.
So if we go back to our code. So we already have our folders and the file which we
have created inside this right here. This was the same file that we have created.
How do we know if the pipeline is automatically triggered? When you go back to this
code, you see a dot initially. If it is in progress, if you see something like a tick mark,
that means the build was successful. This build gives us every information of wh at
happened throughout the process.
If you go through this one by one, although it is not necessary that you understand
what is going on in each and every one of them, but all we are trying to do is
understand and monitor what happened with our pipeline, what steps and in what
sequence it has run. Right. So if you have any errors, if the build has failed, which is
pretty much expected in production, you can come back to this build history and
observe which particular step or which job has failed, make the necessary corrections
and commit and push once again.
Then the build will trigger once again and it will try to make it successful. Right. So this
is how you can monitor and trigger your changes automatically.
DevOps engineers try to set these workflows or these pipelines at a very advanced
level. Usually the pipeline files go around 20 to 40 lines. We have used a simple
example to demonstrate how it works.
So at the moment we have only one job, which is build. For a proper CI CD entire flow
to work, we include many tools in this. We include if we are using Docker to build an
image and run the application on the container, we can create another job specifically
for Docker.
We can create specific jobs related to Kubernetes. We can create specific jobs related
to deployment, which you're going to learn in upcoming lessons. So a pipeline involves
every sequence of task.




  Page 8 of 8


When you want a streamlined process to make sure your application reaches from a
local environment till the user on the Internet, you use these CI CD tools. There are
many other concepts which we haven't discussed, but there are a lot of elements
involved inside your CI CD pipeline, like testing the changes before they go into
deployment. There is a DevOps tool, which is we call it as Ansible, which manages
the configurations of your cloud resources.
So multiple jobs and multiple steps will involve in production. This is exactly how you
manage your entire CI CD flow. Any push to the main branch will trigger this pipeline
automatically.
If I create another branch over here, let's say I create some other private branch. And
I push my changes on that private branch instead of main, the pipeline will not trigger.
And that is how the developers or the DevOps team in production, they make the code
changes on their private branch and they promote their changes just to verify if their
changes are working correctly in the production or not.
The moment they realise that their changes are working fine, no errors are thrown, all
the bugs are fixed, then they promote their changes onto the main branch and then
the main branch, the trigger will be invoked and the pipeline will start building up your
change. So to summarise, we created a repository, pushed a code and configured a
CI pipeline using GitHub actions. Every change is now automatically validated.
You can add multiple steps throughout your pipeline, like verifying the code, looking if
the logic works properly, adding some test frameworks if there is any kind of linting
issues or syntax errors. You can add various tasks throughout this pipeline. And if you
if you want a proper corrected, validated code to enter into the deployment, you can
make sure all of this through this pipeline.
This is just the foundation of modern DevOps workflows. There are many more flows
which are not part of the curriculum, but this is the beginning. So I encourage all of
you to explore beyond this demonstration at your personal space.

            ---------------------------------THANK YOU--------------------------------------
