Good to see you again. In the last
lesson, we explored copywriting and how
words, tone, and structure influence
user attention and action. In this
lesson, we build on foundation by
shifting words to visuals. We will
explore how design principles guide
attention and influence how users see,
interpret, and respond to marketing
visuals. We begin with one of the most
widely used principles in visual design,
the rule of thirds. This divides the
frame into 9 equal sections using 2
horizontal and 2 vertical lines. The
lines intersect at 4 key points where
our eyes naturally tend to focus. This
method is particularly used a lot by
professional photographers as well.
Let's see how professional
photographers use this rule of thirds
and how we as marketeers take
inspiration from them. So firstly,
photographers use this a lot. Instead
of placing the subject at the centre.
They position the key elements along
those lines of intersections that
creates better balance and make the
image feel more dynamic and visually
more interesting. So the rule over here
is your subject should only cover 33%
of the area and the rest 66% of the
area should be blank. To understand why
this rule of third works so well, we
need to understand the concepts called
as positive and negative space.
Positive space refers to the primary
subject of an image, the main element
you want the viewer to notice. Negative
space is everything around it. It will
almost always come into play. It allows
you to create an image that feels
dramatic. Negative space attracts
attention and then naturally leads the
viewer's eyes towards the positive
space. When positive and negative space
work together, they complement each
other, create strong, visually
appealing compositions. OK, so why this
is so important? Because it creates a
clear point of interest. The
relationship between negative space and
subject creates a natural focal point.
By default, the viewer looks at the
intersection points. Placing points of
interest at one of those points
balances your image. This also creates
more tension, energy, and interest in
the photograph or even the ad visual.
To understand how this works in
marketing and design. Look at this
example from Apple iPhone's website.
Notice the generous negative space or
the white space on the left. The large
empty area surrounding the headline
gives it a breathing room and
immediately signals importance. Your
eyes are drawn to the message because
nothing competes with it. Now look at
the right side. The phone sits apart
from the text with clear space around
it. The separation prevents clutter and
allows you to gaze and to move more
naturally from the headline to the
product. Even the Biner button is
surrounded by space, making it easy to
locate and encouraging action without
feeling aggressive. Overall, negative
space creates clarity, directs focus,
reinforces a premium, confident field,
guiding the viewer exactly where the
brand wants attention to go.
At this point, a common question might
have come to your mind, do we always
have to strictly follow the rule of
thirds? The short answer is no, but the
long answer is yes.
No, you can't break the rule of thirds.
It's important to learn the rule before
deciding when and how to break it. In
general, you should only break the rule
for a specific intentional purpose. The
photo here, for example, won Coco
Amerdel 2nd place in the 2017 Lens
Sculpture Portrait Award. The subject
isn't placed on any of the traditional
intersections like rule of thirds or so
on. Here the concept outweighs the
composition, demonstrating one has to
have a great conceptual photography or
design sense to take such a bold and
imaginative steps. OK, with this we
will move to our next concept known as
visual guidance.
Before this, I want you to imagine a
road without a traffic signal. What
would happen? There would be confusion,
delays, and chaos.
So for the same reason, we have traffic
signals in our roads to help guide
drivers when to drive, when to stop,
creating a seamless road experience for
all. Similarly, in marketing, we use
visual cues to achieve what we want our
users to do once they land on our
website. So what is a visual cues?
Visual cues are signals or subtle vibes
within our design. Even without
consciously thinking about them, your
brain instantly recognises the signals,
responds to them, shaping how you
interpret and move through what you see.
Let's take some examples to understand
visual cues. One powerful example of a
visual cue is eye gaze. This is also
known as eye gazing technique. In this
image, the person is looking towards
the text, not the camera. This is
intentional. When a subject's gaze
points towards a key content, it
naturally guides the viewer's eye in
the same direction, subtly leading
attention from the person to the
message. Next category of visual cues,
known as directional cues, they are
also a very powerful form of visual cue.
In this design, notice how the
illustrated characters extend their arm
inwards. The gestures act like visual
arrows pointing directly towards the
headline. Because the poses are
mirrored, they frame the message and
naturally funnel your attention towards
the centre. This creates implied lines
that guide your eyes first to the
headline and then downward to the call
to action, shaping the entire visual
flow of the page. Here's another
example of directional visual cues in
action. Now notice the image directly
reinforces the headline. The
illustration shows a completed
architectural space that reflects the
text about designing delightfully and
building better buildings.
The bus angle and layout also guide to
the viewer's attention and towards the
text. Thus, visual cues are how design
supports strategy, helping marketing
messages. Land faster and stronger.
