Welcome back. In the last lesson, we
explored how visuals and design cues
guide user attention and strengthen
marketing messages. Now we are shifting
focus to behaviour. In this lesson, you
will see how the ABC behaviour model
can be applied in marketing to improve
awareness, drive action, and boost
retention. OK, let's understand the ABC
behaviour model. In marketing, it's
very important to understand why people
act the way that they do. Focusing only
on the behaviour like a click or a
purchase can miss the bigger picture.
That's where the ABC behaviour model
comes in. It's a powerful tool for
looking at the whole picture instead of
focusing too narrowly on a single
problem behaviour. This provides deeper
understanding of why your behaviour
happens and helps guide more effective
interventions. To change or modify it
as and when required.
The ABC behaviour model has three
components. A stands for antecedents.
These are events or triggers that
happen right before their behaviour. B
stands for behaviour, which is the
action that it is observed. And finally,
C stands for consequences. These are
the outcomes or results of the
behaviour showing what happens as a
result. Let's take an example to
understand this ABC behaviour model.
For example, Think of a simple
behaviour like eating fast food. The
antecedent could be feeling anxious or
hungry. The behaviour is eating the
food itself. The consequence is the
temporary feeling of relaxation or
contentment after eating. The
consequence reinforces the behaviour,
showing why it happens.
Now let's try to understand how in
marketing we use this ABC model. In
marketing, the ABC model helps us
understand why consumer behaviours
aren't happening as desired. For
instance, if people don't know your
brand exists, they may need for better
antecedents, meaning you may need
stronger awareness or cues. Sometimes
visitors come to your site, but they
don't buy. That shows behaviour is too
difficult, perhaps due to the high
friction or a confusing consumer
experience. And even when people make a
purchase, they may never return. Which
points to weak consequences. This could
be no reward or retention hope
encouraging them to come back by
looking at each step. The ABC model
helps us design interventions that
guide consumers towards the behaviour
that we want. Let's explore a concrete
example to see how the ABC model works
at a business and marketing environment.
Let's take example of our favourite
coffee shop, Starbucks. At Starbucks,
the antecedent is a push notification
that has been sent to you at 2:00 p.m.,
offering an afternoon half off price
deal. The behaviour is what the user
does. They open the app, select reorder,
and pay with a click. The consequence
immediate is they skip the line and
earn Starbucks loyalty points in their
account. This simple ABC pattern shows
how a carefully designed trigger,
action, and reward can guide consumer
behaviour effectively and efficiently.
