


  Page 1 of 8



Provisioning Resources with Terraform
Transcript
Module 13, Lesson 4, Practical Lab. So far, we've  been creating AWS resources
manually using the console. That works for learning, but it doesn't scale in real teams.
In real world DevOps, infrastructure must be repeatable, version controlled, automated
and reviewable. So Terraform lets us describe infrastructure as a code. If the code
exists, the infrastructure exists.
As simple as that, Terraform is considered as declarative, not imperative, as in you
say what you want and Terraform figures out how to do it. In today's demonstration,
we are going to observe how Terraform works and how it is widely used across 99%
projects in today's industry. So you can just type in download Terraform.
From here, you can pick in the first URL that is provided. Once you land on this page,
you'll see various options to download and set up Terraform as per your operating
system, whether you're using a Mac, Windows or Linux, you can directly run these
commands or you can directly download the .exe file and instal it as usual. Same goes
for Linux across multiple distributions.
After setting up Terraform, you can also verify it through your command prompt. So
you can just open your command prompt or your terminal if you're using a Mac, you
can just type in Terraform version. So you'll see something similar to this.
That means your Terraform is set up properly. This confirms Terraform is installed and
accessible from your terminal or command prompt. Just follow that documentation
from there and you should be landing on this exact line.
Once our Terraform is set up, it needs authorisation to communicate with our AWS
console and Terraform does not log into the AWS magically. It uses AWS credentials
exactly like the AWS CLI. For that, again, you should make sure that you have AWS
CLI configured into your laptop.
So again, for that, you can just type in AWS instal. You can pick out any of the AWS
documentation. They have a detailed guidance on how to run.
So once you land on a similar page like this, you go to instal or update. If you already
have, you can update to the latest version 2. Version 1 also works fine. It is not
mandatory that you have to work on version 2. So you have multiple options according
to your operating system.




  Page 2 of 8


Just follow the guidelines, follow the commands used and you'll be able to set up AWS
CLI. Post this setup, let's try to create a project in our local environment. So let's say I
create a project over here, simple directory, I'll say Terraform AWS demo.
So I'll open my VS code again. We'll try to create the Terraform files and perform all
the operations from this VS code. Let's open that project which we just created.
Now let me open my terminal. From here, once you have set up your AWS CLI and
Terraform, you have to run AWS configure. As demonstrated in previous practical lab
and multiple demonstrations, we need to have an access key and a secret key,
basically getting it from an IAM user.
So let's log into our AWS account. So first thing is I'll go ahead to IAM. From IAM, I
should have a user with the desired permissions to perform these operations.
So I've created a dummy user and I've given it all the necessary permissions to create
any service in this console via Terraform. I'll head to this user and I've also created the
access keys for this particular user. But you can go ahead and click on create access
keys from here.
You use CLI, checkbox this and click on next. It will ask you for a tag. Then you click
on create access key.
It will display the access key and the secret key. Make sure that you have an option
somewhere around here to download your access key and secret key. So we are going
to use exactly those keys.
So I have it saved already over here. For temporary basis, I have created this user.
So you can copy the access key and secret key over here and just configure your
AWS.
Same goes with the secret key. The region you can keep it as default, just keep on
pressing enter. And now our AWS is successfully configured.
We can also verify if our AWS from the local environment is able to communicate with
our console or not. The command for that is AWS STS get caller identity. Once you
run this command, this will display certain details about your user and your account
ID.
So this is the user which I created, the dummy user. And this is the account which I
have and this is the user ID, which means now my Terraform is able to interact with
my AWS console. I can do anything with Terraform.
What we are going to do from here is in this lab, we will write Terraform configurations,
initialise Terraform, we will preview the changes and create the infrastructure. Post
creation, we'll verify it in AWS, play along with this Terraform a little bit, t hen we'll
destroy everything safely so that we do not incur any AWS billing. This is how we are
going to observe the full Terraform lifecycle in this practical lab.



  Page 3 of 8



First thing is we always have a main.tf file inside which we define every configuration
related to an infrastructure. Before diving into it, so let's quickly verify if we have any
EC2 instances so that we can if we do not have any EC2 instances, we can go ahead
and create two EC2 instances. So at the moment, we do not have any running
instances.
These are so at the moment, we do not have any running instances. So pretty much
it is empty if you verify from the dashboard, again, we do not have any instances. Do
we have an S3 bucket? We do not have any active S3 bucket server, so let's try to
create two EC2 instances and one S3 bucket through our code through Terraform.
So I'll just create a simple file main.tf. Let's try to start adding the configurations into
this main.tf file. So it always starts with Terraform. Then you add the required providers
like which provider you are looking to interact with.
So I would say AWS in our case. Inside AWS, you need to provide the source and the
version. Basically we are providing the official path to our AWS provider.
So you get all this information from the Terraform documentation. So it is not
mandatory that you have to remember all of this. But having the skeleton in the mind
is very important when you work with Terraform.
The first thing is the source, then it would be the version. So for the version, we can
use something related to 5.0. This is the version I would like to use. Basically we are
trying to maintain a stability, a version constraint.
Next is providing the actual provider details. So for that, I'll use provider AWS. This is
going to be my cloud provider.
And whenever we log into our AWS, we should always make sure what region we are
going to create our services or our application. So region is always something that you
need to provide when you give the details of the cloud provider. I'll say US East one,
we can use the default one.
So this provider block tells Terraform where to create the resources. Now, now that
we have provided every detail about the cloud provider, what version to use, where to
find and everything. Now let's dive into providing the actual details of the resource that
we want to create.
So we have to declare a resource. Here, every resource has its own name, which we
call it as resource type. So we can say AWS instance and we can give any name to
this instance.
So normally we would we would manually type in the name when we create it through
our console. We can give it something similar to a web. Now coming to the remaining
details, whatever details that we are going to fill when we do it manually, we are going
to provide all the details exactly in a form of a code.



  Page 4 of 8



That is the only difference. Rest everything is absolutely the same. So we can skip it
or we can provide the count.
This is not a mandatory, mandatory line. Mandatory ones are AMIs, which defines
what type of an operating system your EC2 instances should have. In production,
these AMIs are usually saved somewhere so we can directly add a particular AMI ID.
So since it is hard to remember, we'll just try to copy from here for now. So when we
try to launch instance, it will give us the AMI IDs. So let's say if I want a Linux based
AMI, so I'll just use this AMI.
Then the instance type, instance type will use the free tier, which is T2.micro. Since
we are trying to create two instances in this case. It is always recommended that you
provide something unique to these two EC2 instances. For that, we use tags.
Let's say in the tags, I would want to provide a unique name. For example, I want to
say Terraform EC2. And there is something that we use as count.index. I'll say plus
one.
So if we have two instances, it is going to say Terraform -EC2-1. Then for the second
one, it is going to name it as Terraform-EC2-2. If we add five, it is going to add 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. That is the logic.
We're just trying to add. It's OK even if you skip this tags part. This is not mandatory.
So this tags is just an identification to segregate your resources. AMI is the operating
system image to define how we are trying to, how and what type of operating system
does our server need. Count is just for the looping to make sure how many resources
that we want.
AWS instance is the resource type. Web is the name that we provide. And resource is
defining to Terraform that this is what I want to create using Terraform.
This one block replaces clicking your launch instance twice. If I had to perform two
instances within my console, I had to add all these details and click on this launch
instance twice. So to avoid this thing, we use Terraform.
If I had to spin up 100 EC2 instances, in that case, I can't obviously come back to
launch instance, add the details, add the instance type, add the AMI and then do this
whole process 100 times. It is not technically or it is going to be very time consuming.
That is the solution that Terraform provides.
All you have to do is change this to 100 and you will have 100 EC2 instances created
instantly. This is the purpose of using Terraform and why all the projects use this. Let's
add one more resource.
We use and follow the same. This time we'll add an S3 bucket. So I'll say Amazon S3
bucket.



  Page 5 of 8



I'll give a name something similar to data bucket. So whenever you want to create a
bucket, you should provide a proper name to your bucket as well. So that is what we
are going to do.
We'll say Terraform demo bucket will give some unique name so that it doesn't fall
under already exist because Terraform bucket names should always be unique. Now,
S3 bucket names must be globally unique. This is something that we have learned in
the last demonstration.
So this bucket related to this data bucket, it could store some data sets or model
outputs. You can use it for any storage purposes. So once we let's go through this
entire line of code.
So this is the entire Terraform code that we are going to execute now. All we did is in
the Terraform block, we provided the version and the source of what cloud provider
we want. Then we explicitly define the cloud provider and the region inside which we
want to create the below two resources and the below resources have all the details
required to create an EC2 instance.
One is for EC2 and one is for the S3 bucket on control S and save this file. Now let's
get into the action whenever you are going to start with your Terraform lifecycle. You
always have to initialise it before applying any changes.
The command for that is Terraform init. This downloads the providers and prepares
the project. Basically, it sets the ground of what all plugins are required, what all
packages are required, what all dependencies do we have to interact with AWS cloud
provider and get this job done.
Everything required for that job, it is going to instal it. So always Terraform init should
be run when you're trying to create a resource for the very first time. Or if there is any
gap in the provider or any other resource, it is always recommended to st art your
Terraform with Terraform init command.
After this, now that your changes are saved, you have the playground set up for you
by a Terraform init. The next step is to observe what is going to be prepared. Basically,
a preview to understand what this Terraform, this main.terraform file is going to create
for me once I apply the changes.
So all the Terraform plan does is plan shows exactly what Terraform will change. So
if we come from the start, so from here, the first thing it is saying that there is going to
be an AWS instance web created. So there is a resource.
It will be created with this AMI and all these details will be poured over here once the
resource is created. Since we do not have the resource created yet, that's the reason
we do not see some values. Whatever values we have provided, like this is going t o
be the instance type and the AMI, the tags that we provided, it is going to provide all
the details.



  Page 6 of 8



Same goes for the second EC2 instance as well. Initially it was 1, it was 0, now it is 1.
So this is the second EC2 instance. This is the AMI that they are going to use and this
is the, this is the instance type that they are going to create.
Same goes for S3 bucket as well. So plan gives you a preview of what you're going to
do, two EC2 instances, one S3 bucket. Let's get this into action.
So now that we are sure that three items are going to add two EC2 and one S3, let's
try to implement this using Terraform. So to apply these changes, to make it as to turn
this code into an infrastructure over your cloud, you have to run Terraform apply.
Terraform now will call the AWS APIs.
Post calling it will take a confirmation from you if you really want to do this or not. So
here it says to type in yes and we are going to do the same. After typing in yes, it is
going to interact with the AWS APIs and start creating the resources based on  the
information that you provide.
Within a couple of seconds, it is going to set up the whole infrastructure. Depending
upon the complexity, sometimes it might take one or two minutes and sometimes it
might take five minutes also. Here we have three resources to be created across
multiple services.
That's the reason it took us roughly around five to six seconds. So now we have a
confirmation from Terraform saying that our resources are now created. Let's check
this out.
So if I refresh it, these are the terminated instances which I was just verifying. So let's
refresh and see if our new instances are created or not. OK.
So these are our two instances that we created using Terraform. We use the instance
type T2 micro, we did not provide any availability zone. So it picked out its own
availability zone.
And now our instances are up and running. Same if we observe into the S3 buckets,
we'll also have a Terraform bucket mentioned over here. This is the same bucket that
we created and there are no objects as of now because we did not upload anything.
So it's a fresh bucket that we created. This is how Terraform can instantly set up your
resources, converting your code into an actual infrastructure. This is why Terraform is
referred to as infrastructure as a code.
Now that we have the resources already present, if we try to rerun the same Terraform
file again, let's say if I run Terraform apply once again, let's observe if it is going to
create one more S3 and two more EC2 instances or it is going to just ignore it, saying
that the desired state is matching with the actual state. So as you can see, the moment
I ran Terraform again, it gave me no changes. Your infrastructure matches the
configuration.



  Page 7 of 8



Whatever our desired state is in this lines of code, it is exactly what my AWS console
already have. This infrastructure is already active. So rather than recreating it and
making duplicates, which will avoid, which will invite more buildings for us, Terra form
ignores those.
So no changes, there are zero that are added, zero that are changed and zero that
are destroyed. Now that our resources are created properly with no manual clicks, let's
try to the way we have created, let's try to destroy them and remove, clean up our
resources instantly. The command for that is Terraform destroy.
Again, it is going to interact with the AWS APIs. It will pick out whatever resources that
we mentioned over here. It will look for those resource and it will try to delete it.
But before deleting, once again, it is going to ask for your confirmation that if you are
sure, type in yes, but there is no going back once you try to type yes. Since we are
sure that we want to clean up our resources to avoid any building, we type yes. A nd
our resources will be cleared instantly.
OK, so now we got a confirmation saying that three resources have been destroyed.
Although I'm sure that the resources are destroyed, I won't be able to see, but just for
a safer side, I'm just observing that my resources are properly deleted or not. The
moment you see a confirmation from the Terraform, the resources are properly
removed.
Although this verification is not needed, since I'm trying to demonstrate, I want you
guys to observe how Terraform can instantly spin up numerous resources and also
clean them up instantly.  This is exactly how you can work closely using Terraform.
And this is not just for AWS.
Within this same configuration file, you can also add another provider like GCP or
Azure, create a resources present in those cloud providers and manage the
infrastructure for those resources as well. Terraform is not limited to just one cloud
platform. You have hundreds of cloud providers, AWS, Azure and GCP are the popular
ones.
Outside of this, we have Oracle, we have DigitalOcean, we have Alibaba and there
are many other cloud platforms. Terraform supports each and every one of them. All
you have to do is add in this column, you have to provide the cloud provider and the
region that you want to create the resource and then the resource that you want to be
created as part of that provider.
This is all that you have to do. This is exactly the reason why projects that are
dependent on multi-cloud or hybrid cloud environments, they heavily use Terraform to
manage their infrastructure. Rather than providing the username and passwords to
the team members and giving them the console access to navigate throughout the



  Page 8 of 8


console and create the resources manually, Terraform is a one-stop solution to create
multiple resources, not only EC2 or S3.

It could even create a security group and IAM user and IAM role or any other load
balancers or networking components. Every service that we have in AWS can be
created using Terraform. So, to summarise, today we used Terraform to define, create,
verify and destroy the AWS infrastructure.
This is infrastructure as code, something which is predictable, repeatable and
automation ready. All you had to do is maintain this file. As a core DevOps practise,
how these Terraform files are maintained is these are part of your project files.
You can also commit and push these files to your GitHub repository so that anyone
who makes change to any of these details, we can have a proper version control and
observe which lines of your Terraform code are modified and built accordingly. So this
is another benefit where you can properly have a well -structured audit mechanism to
understand what changes are going throughout your Terraform code. Feel free to
explore more on how to build resources, how to use other resources and create them
using Terraform.
You also have a proper documentation within Terraform, which gives you a more
detailed view of how and where you can set up. We go to the documentation from
here. So you have all the details within your Terraform.
What type of a Terraform script do you want? How would you want to configure your
Terraform across multiple platforms? So every little detail you have in the
documentation, the code which I have written, even that can be provided directly. You
have a proper tutorials where you can explore beyond what we have learned. So you
have every service, even related to Kubernetes or Docker, you can also set up
Kubernetes clusters using Terraform.
Terraform is not only limited to cloud providers. You can also create other DevOps
tools as well using Terraform. That's all.


            ---------------------------------THANK YOU--------------------------------------
