In our last video, we celebrated the
resilience of MapReduce. We saw how
functional purity and Master Node's
ability to reassign tasks make the
cluster nearly unbreakable. But as an
architect, you know that there is no
such thing as a free lunch. To achieve
that level of fault tolerance,
MapReduce has to pay a significant
performance tax. Today we are going to
look at the slide and discuss the
biggest bottleneck in this model, the
cost of disk-based intermediate state,
the 3x ride penalty. In MapReduce, data
doesn't just flow through memory from
mapper to reducer. To ensure that we
don't lose progress if a node fails,
the framework rides all intermediate
data. The results of map phase directly
to the physical disc because we are
using distributed file systems like
SDFS, that data is automatically
replicated 3 times across the cluster
for safety. This means if your mapper
produces 1 terabyte of intermediate
data, the cluster actually has to write
3 terabytes of the discs. This write
penalty consumes a massive amount of
storage space. And more importantly,
takes a lot of time. This brings us to
the core of distributed processing
limits, as the slide mentions. Writing
preprocessed data post map and
post-reduce introduces steep IO latency
as well. If you remember our lesson on
hardware constraints in Module 1,
you'll recall that disc IO, or disc
input output, is the slowest part of
the computer. Every time a map task
finishes, The CPU has to stop and wait
for the slow mechanical or SSD to
finish writing those 3 copies before
the shuffle phase can even begin. This
stop and copy rhythm creates a massive
bottleneck. While it makes the system
incredibly reliable, it also makes
MapReduce significantly slower for jobs
that need to pass data through multiple
stages. So what is the job of big data
engineer here? As the final point on
the slide states, performance tuning
ensures minimising this disk-based
intermediate state cost. To optimise
execution time, we try to map logic
that philtres out as much junk data as
possible. So that the volume of
intermediate data hitting the disc is
as small as it can be, we want to turn
the 10 terabytes of logs into a tiny
stream of results as quickly as
possible. The more we reduce the
intermediate state, the less time we
spend waiting on the disc and the
faster our job completes. To wrap up,
MapReduce is resilient because it saves
everything to disc. MapReduce is slow
because it saves everything to disc.
Understanding this trade-off is vital.
In fact, this exact disc overhead
problem is what led to the creation of
Apache Spark, which we will learn later
in this course. Spark tries to do all
of this in memory to avoid the 3 x ride
penalty.
