Now that we have covered the theory and
the internal mechanics of RDDs, it's
time to actually roll up our sleeves
and create something. There are 2 main
ways to create an RDD in Spark. And in
this video we are going to look at the
first one. Which is paralysing local
collections. As you can see on screen,
the concept here is very
straightforward. Often when you're
starting a project, you might have a
simple amount of data already sitting
in your Python code.
Maybe it's a list of numbers, a
dictionary, or an array of strings. To
turn that local list. Into a
distributed RDD you use the command
sc.paralllyze, and in the argument you
provide your data. The SC stands for
Spark context, which is your entry
point to all Spark functionality. When
you run this command, something very
cool happens behind the scenes. Spark
takes that list from your driver's
memory, chops it into the partitions we
discussed earlier, and physically
copies those pieces out to the worker
nodes in your cluster.
So why would you use this method?
The answer is prototyping and testing.
It's the fastest way to test a small
bit of logic without needing to connect
to a massive external database,
synthetic data. It is great for
generating simple data sets for
simulation. Just remember, since this
data starts on your drive.
The main computer running your script,
this method is only for small data sets.
You wouldn't want to try this with a
500 GB file. OK, now let's jump into
the code. So in line number 4 we are
creating a Spark session. And then in
line number 5 we have created something
called spark context that we already
discussed. Now I have a small list of
names that I have.
And then I want this list to be
converted into RDT. I need to call this
command called Sc.pananalyze, but what
happens is Spark will actually convert
this list into this RDD.
And then we can, you know, print and
see what are the values in this
particular RDT. So the values are the
same as the list, but actually this is
RDD. To validate that, we'll just
verify. What is the type of object that
we have created and clearly on screen
you can see it's a Pie Spark RDD that
we have created. Now that you know how
to turn local code into an RDD.
What do we do when our data is too big
for our local machine? In our next
video we'll look at the method 2, which
is loading data from external.
Files or external sources. I'll see you
in the next class. Till then, happy
learning. Thank you.
