Welcome back learners to Lesson 2.
Let's go through the BERT architecture.
So Bert. Which stands for bidirectional
encoder representations from
transformers, is essentially a stack of
transformer encoders. It is an encoder
only model. The base BT, or BET base,
has 12 layers of encoders, and the
larger version of BIRT, called BERT
Large, has 24 layers of encoder models.
To give you a recap, here's the
transformer model, which was a
combination of encoder and decoder
model, right? We saw in the last module
that GPT is a decoder only model, and
the BIRT is an encoder only model, so
it's just this part.
Bert was not trained to translate. It
was trained on 2 self-supervised tasks
using the entire Wikipedia.
Mask language modelling and next
sentence prediction. Let's go through
these
So the idea in MLM or masked language
modelling, is to force the model to use
context from both sides to fill in the
blanks, hence bidirectional, right? So
the sentence.
The cat sat. On the. Matt, the model is
trained so that it looks at the
sentence in one way and in the second
way as well, bidirectional.
Now suppose the training is on this
sentence itself. What will happen is it
will go through multiple iterations
where certain words will be masked. So
for example, this will be hidden from
the model, and the model's job will be
to predict what is the right word. So
it will keep on predicting different
words until it achieves the right
target, which is sat.
Now let's go to next sentence
prediction, or NSP. The idea here is to
teach the model relationships between
sentences. This is very crucial for
question and answering bots and
summarization as well.
So for example, if the model was
trained on this, the man went to the
store to buy milk.
Here, it can be broken down into two
sentences, sentence A being the man
went to the store, and sentence B being
to buy milk.
The model will be trained on this
training data, and then it will be
asked to predict the following sentence
given the previous sentence. So given
the sentence A, its task will be to
predict the sentence B, and that's it
for this video. Thank you.
