


  Page 1 of 8


2-Tier Architecture Design Transcript
In this session, we'll design a simple two-tier architecture wherein the tier one will have
our web server which will handle users and user interface, basically a website. Then
in the tier two, we'll have a database server which will store the data and per form all
the database related operations for us. Now, the key idea is separation of
responsibilities and security.
Let me walk you through the flow of our architecture. Whenever a user tries to interact
with our website, which is hosted on this remote server, which is EC2, and any
operations that need to be performed on the database, the user should not directly
have access to our database, which is hosted on AWS. For that, what we do, we only
add a source like a web server, like EC2 in this case, to interact with the database and
make the necessary operations.
So the entire flow of this demonstration is going to be around making sure that our
resources are public and private at the same time. So in this case, our web server is
going to be publicly accessible to the users from the internet. At the same time, our
RDS database is going to be restricted for the public on the internet.
Let's try to build this exact architecture. So this is the entire architecture that we'll try
to replicate into the production level. So how the flow looks like is when a user from
the internet is going to or willing to interact with your server or with your website hosted
inside an EC2 instance, so they have to enter a VPC network.
So from a network layer, we have Amazon VPC. This is a private network inside which
the application is being hosted. Then we have a web tier wherein we are using Amazon
EC2 to run our application or the website.
Then for the database tier, we are using Amazon RDS, which is a managed database
and useful to perform all of our DB operations. Then for the security, we are using
security groups individually, one for our web tier, one for our database tier. We're not
going to use a single group because using a single group would categorise them under
the same sort of firewall permissions.
We want our users to interact with this, but we don't want our users to interact with the
DB. That's the reason we maintain separate security groups. Now, for your server to
interact with your database security group, we set up a common ground so that only
requests coming from the web server are accepted and processed by your RDS, by
your database.
Now, all of these resources are going to be launched inside some availability zone. In
this case, it is US East 1A. Remember, they are regions and availability zones.
So in one of the region, in one of the availability zone, they're going to set up. Coming
to the subnets inside our VPC, since we want our web server to be accessible publicly,
we are going to place it inside a public subnet. Since we do not want our datab ase to
be accessible over the internet, we are going to place it inside a private subnet.



  Page 2 of 8



Now, getting inside the VPC, the users will always pass along with the internet
gateway. So this internet gateway will act as the door for your entry and exit into this
VPC. This is the last layer of security that we are going to add and allow the users
outside this private network.
So every time a user tries or wants to navigate your website, he gets inside your VPC
through an internet gateway, then he interacts to the public subnet inside which your
EC2 instance is hosting the website. After navigating, if he's creating an account o r
saving some address details or payment details, and those need to be saved inside a
database, that is when EC2 instance will send a request to the DB saying that I have
this request to be saved. And that is when the DB will verify if the request that it got is
from a web server or from the user directly.
After validating, it will process and the operation will be successful. This is how the
entire two-tier architecture works in production. Now, let's try to perform this practically
and understand the flow.
First, let's create our web tier. So we'll launch an instance in this case, we'll name it as
app web server. We'll use the default settings.
The key pair, let's create a key pair called as simple architecture. So we're going to
use this key pair to log in inside our remote server from anywhere that we want,
whether it is from our local terminal or from any other server. Now, we use a default
VPC because AWS provides us a default VPC to interact with.
So we can also create a new VPC but for that we have to create our own subnets and
everything. So since AWS already gave us the option, we are going to use this.
Coming to the security groups, which is the actual firewall for our resources, we'll
create a security group.
Let's say we'll call this as web security group. We'll say this security group is configured
to allow internet access. Now, first thing is since we want the users from the internet
to access this server because inside this server is where the application runs.
So for that we need to provide a HTTP since we are working with the internet. I'm
going to keep it as anywhere so that anyone can interact with this. Next is I'm going to
add one more rule over here for us.
If ever we want to interact with this remote server, we need to do SSH. Remember
SSH wherein we have to perform certain commands and we can interact with this
remote server even from our local command prompt or terminal. So we can use either
anywhere or my IP.
So when you choose my IP, it will select your IP address automatically. Since I don't
want to expose my IP address, I'm just going with anywhere in this case. So I have
two security groups ready and let's launch our instance.



  Page 3 of 8



So our EC2 instance is ready. We'll give it a couple of seconds and it will be up and
running. So we have one instance over here which we have just created.
It is already running. It is an availability zone US East 1C. This is the public IP address.
This is the security group. Let's go inside our security group and re -verify if whatever
we have created is there or not. So the first rule we already have for our in the inbound
rules.
Let's open it from here. So we have two types of inbound rules. The first one is for the
HTTP which is for the users on the internet to access this server.
Then we have a SSH type of inbound rule which is for us to log in inside this remote
server and perform certain operations. So EC2 instance is properly configured. Let's
try to create a database.
So here once you get into the database you click on the top right go to create database.
Here you will have multiple options to choose whichever database engine you want to
create. So always go with this full configuration.
Do not go with easy create because it will have some recommended practises which
we might not need. So always go with the full configuration. Then in the engine options
you have various options like Postgre, IBM, Microsoft, SQL, Oracle, MariaDB.
We are going to go with MySQL. In this case we use the production template. You can
use multi AZ.
Coming to the templates we have production well I think it's better we use a free tier
so that we can avoid any billing in our case. So we use free tier. We'll give this
database instance a name like AppDB.
A username Masha username for our DB can leave it as admin. For credentials you
have two types. There is an AWS managed service which is secret manager.
Since we haven't covered this yet so we'll go with the self-managed and we'll use auto
generate password. The password will be generated automatically and we can use
that for now. Then coming to the connectivity since we want our database to be
restricted we don't have to connect to our EC2 instance.
So we'll just leave it as it is. We'll use the default VPC again over here as well.
Whatever default VPC we used for EC2 instance for our web server we are going to
use the same default VPC for our DB as well because ultimately we want both of our
tiers to be present under one VPC.
So we are going to use the default one. Coming to the public access we don't want
our database to be accessible publicly so make sure you select this as no. This is
always no by default unless you keep it yes but always keep it as no.



  Page 4 of 8



It is a proper verification that you have to do. Next step is the security group. So for
our EC2 instance we have created one security group which is web security group.
Similarly for our database also we have to create a separate security group because
using this existing security group will allow your database to have public access on the
internet. We added two inbound rules for the security group. First is anyone can access
from the internet which is the HTTP protocol.
Then we added SSH connection also. We want our database to accept request only
from this security group not from anybody else. So we cannot use that security group.
Let's try to create a new one. We'll name it as DB security group. We're not creating
any inbound rules as of now.
We're just creating a firewall. Once this is created we'll edit the inbound rules. You can
read the remaining options as it is.
Those are for monitoring. We'll go ahead with creating our database. So here the
database does not allow internet traffic but we need it to allow traffic coming from the
web server's security group.
As per our architecture we need our database to accept requests coming in from our
web server security group. So let's work on that. Let me open my database over here.
So it is in creating state. It will take couple of minutes. In the meantime we'll just set
up the security group for this.
So I have the security that I created. Let's open this in a new tab. So if we go to the
inbound rules there is only one default rule.
It says MySQL TCP and the source is something else in this case. But we want our
database to have the source of web server security group. So we edit the inbound
rules.
We delete this existing one and create a new one. So I'll say custom and we'll search
for the group which we have created. This is the exact security group that we want our
database to listen and perform the actions.
Anything apart from this it should deny straight away. This is the only source and only
resource that it should be considering to perform the actions. So I have chosen that
as the source and I'll save the rules.
So now we have total three security. This is the default one. So this is the web security
group that we created for our EC2 instance and these are the the inbound rules that
we've selected.
Next comes our database security group and the only source for this is we are allowing
our MySQL and we make sure that the source is only the security group that we



  Page 5 of 8


created for the web tier and make sure the port is correct. So the port should not or
never be open at all. Right.
So let's check if our database is ready or not. All right. So it's still in progress.
Now before we go ahead there is one thing that you need to observe which is for our
every database there is always a master username and endpoint and a password.
Endpoint and the username you can get it from here. Once it is created you get the
endpoint over here and you get the port number just to be sure.
Right. Coming to the password we have set it up as auto-generated. So this is where
you get to see that password whichever password got auto-generated.
So you can save the master username and the password and just save the password
over here although it is not recommended to make sure that you save the password
somewhere safe. Once it is created we can try to get inside this database and verify
the connection is set. All right.
So now my database is up and running. Right. So if I click on this it is in the
configuration state.
Let's see if we have. OK. Let's refresh the tab.
So this is my DB app DB and the engine that I'm using is MySQL. It is in this region
and availability zone. This is the endpoint that is used to interact or connect with my
database.
This is the port that should be used. Now the VPC is the default VPC which we created
and as you can see publicly it is not accessible. So this proves that our database is
not able to cannot interact with any resource except for the one defined in the security
group.
So let's try to interact with this security group and directly from our EC2 instance. So
let's head back to our EC2. We'll see if our EC2 is able to communicate with this
database or not.
So this is our web server. This is the web server that we have created. Let's try to
connect to it.
As discussed earlier in the EC2 demonstration we have two types to interact with our
remote server either through the browser by clicking on connect or if you want to
interact from your local command prompt or terminal you can run these two
commands. But for now we'll go with this. Click on connect.
So now I'm inside my EC2 instance. So let's try to set up our MySQL. Since this is a
new remote server obviously it does not have any database clients installed inside.
So we'll just try to set up our MySQL. So for that we can use MariaDB engine also. We
can use any engine.



  Page 6 of 8



We are not using MariaDB. We're just using the MariaDB client to use and interact
with our MySQL. It should take a couple of seconds to have it completely installed.
All right. So our MariaDB is installed. Let's verify if MySQL is set up properly.
So our MySQL is also set up perfectly. Now we can actually test the entire flow of how
our EC2 instance is present, how we can interact with it. Let's run the command.
So to test the flow we use MySQL hyphen h. Here we need to provide the endpoint.
This is our endpoint for our database. We'll paste it.
Then we need to provide the name of the user which is in our case it is admin. We'll
try to prompt the password rather than copy pasting it. So I click on enter.
It'll ask me for the password. So I'll type in the password over here. Obviously it won't
be visible.
It's going to be hidden. So as you can see initially this was our username which is our
remote server. Now we have logged inside our MySQL.
This proves EC2 and our relational database connectivity are using the security groups
correctly. I logged into the web server and from there I'm able to connect to the
database. This means the web tier and the database tier communication is working
fine between both of these.
The security groups are perfectly configured. If I run this exact command that I have
run from my local laptop from my command prompt or terminal it is going to show as
access denied even though I have the endpoint and I have the right password. Just
because my laptop is not part of the security group it is going to deny the request.
This is how you separate the security at the same time use the resources together as
part of launching your applications or websites. Now if I just type in show databases
let's say from here I have a couple of details and if I say use MySQL. So now my
database has changed to MySQL.
If I click on show tables inside this so we haven't created any tables as of now but
AWS will have certain tables. So these are the databases and tables within the system
that was created automatically by the AWS MySQL. They are required for MySQL and
Amazon RDS to function properly.
So these are created by them. Now if we want to create we can just normally the way
we try to create a database we create our own. Let's say I want to create a database
as MyDB.
Let me correct that again there is a typing error. Okay so now we have created a
database. We can use anything if I say use AppDB.




  Page 7 of 8


All the operations that we perform inside a database it gets changed. You can create
a table you can insert the data. Everything is absolutely the same.
This proves that every operation that we are trying to do through our EC2 inside our
database all of them are performed correctly. So this is how we set up our
infrastructure when a user opens a website a request hits the EC2 through the internet
gateway. Then the app's logic will run inside our EC2.
Let's say if I just click on exit I'm back into my EC2 instance. So assume there are
certain applications or code files that are running my application. So all of my
application is running inside this server at the moment.
So EC2 queries the database if any particular logic requires to put or post some details
into the database then since web server is configured as a source to accept and run
the request so DB will perform the actions. This is how the communication happens.
Users can interact with your website within a private network and keep your resources
secure with multiple security layers like VPC internet gateway and the security groups
and subnets.
Users are never going to see this database but every operation that they require to
store certain details are going to be performed without being exposed. Now common
mistakes that everyone does is making your database public. Missing out on making
it a yes will make it publicly accessible.
Opening the database port to a random open port. So we have used a dedicated port
thinking that your EC2 instance is going to store the data permanently. If I go ahead
and try to terminate this instance also without having a proper knowledge that there is
an application running inside.
So I'm going to lose that particular application directly once I try to terminate this
instance. So the data is never secure in your EC2 instance. You should always have
a persistent storage like EBS and the last mistake mixing your web and database tier
on the same instance.
You always have to separate them have a different subnets have a different security
groups and have a separate service for both of them rather than mixing everything into
one. So this is how you set up your two tier architecture. Now additionally if you wa nt
to elaborate into a more expanded form then all you do is you expand your VPC.
Let's say our current architecture is only running in one availability zone. If the
database is crashed over here and the users are constantly trying to save some details
but since the database is crashed all those operations are returning some failures and
the customers are getting frustrated. To avoid such things what we do we replicate the
exact same environment and we create the same resources in another availability
zone.
So here we have used US East 1. So maybe here we can use we can set it up into
another availability zone let's say US East 1 C or 1 D. So whenever if this is down this



  Page 8 of 8


particular availability zone will serve the traffic it will try to perform all the operations
until this is up and running. As long as this is filled this will be added as a duplicate or
it will be acting as a support resource. So to summarise this two-tier architecture is the
foundation of many cloud applications.
Separation of web and database will improve security and scalability. Every advanced
architecture that you're going to see in microservices kubernetes or any serverless
architecture all of them are built on the similar principles. Hope you understood this
demonstration.

------------------------------------------------------End-----------------------------------------------------
