


  Page 1 of 1


VPC Basics Transcript
In this lesson, we are going to understand one of the most important building blocks
of cloud networking, the VPC or Virtual Private Cloud. At a very high level, a VPC is
your own private network inside AWS. Even though AWS is a public cloud, your VPC
is logically isolated and fully under your control.
Inside this private network, you decide the IP ranges, how the traffic is going to be
flowing and which resources are public or private and how secure everything should
be. Now, why do we even need something like a VPC? Without a VPC, all cloud
resources would live in a shared space with very little control. So, security would be
harder, isolation would be weaker and designing real applications could be a very high
risk.
So, a VPC solves this by giving you a private predictable network boundary. Inside a
VPC, you place things like a subnet, route table, gateways, and other security controls.
And inside those, you run your EC2 instances, databases, load balancers, and any
other services that you want.
One important difference between cloud networking and traditional networking is that
everything here is software defined. There are no physical routers or cables for you to
manage. You create and modify the entire network using configuration.
A helpful way to think about a VPC is AWS is like a large city and your VPC is a fenced
plot of land inside that city. AWS manages the city infrastructure, but inside your fence,
you make the rules. You decide who can enter, how traffic moves within that f ence,
and what runs inside.
Almost every serious AWS workload starts with a VPC. If you understand VPC well,
cloud networking becomes structured and logical instead of confusing. In the next
topic, we will go deeper and look at concepts like SIDR blocks and IP addressing,
which actually define how the addresses are assigned inside a VPC.

------------------------------------------------------End-----------------------------------------------------
