Hi again. Welcome to the next video
where we'll be taking a deep dive into
the foundational knowledge for Google
Ads. But first, let's begin by looking
at the policies that guide advertising
on Google. Google strives to maintain a
healthy advertisement ecosystem that is
trustworthy and transparent both for
users, advertisers, and publishers. The
purpose of the health centre is to
assist advertisers in building Google
Ads campaigns that align with these
advertisement policies. The policies
are essential for ensuring a safe and
positive experience for users while
also ensuring compliance with
applicable laws. They also play a key
role in preventing harmful content from
appearing in the advertisement
ecosystem. Google advertisement
policies are broadly divided into four
broad areas. First is prohibited
content, content that cannot be
advertised on Google Network. Then we
have prohibited policies, actions that
you can't take if you want to advertise.
Then we have restricted content and
features, content that can be
advertised but with certain limitations.
And finally we have editorial and
technical standards, quality standards
for your ads, websites, and apps that
you have to maintain to ensure running
ads on Google.
Now that we have covered policies,
let's move to understand how Google Ads
work. Google Ads operates through a
process that begins with user
interaction. When a user searches on
Google, visits a Google Display Network,
or GDN, Google conducts a quick auction
for the available ad space. Advertisers
place bids for these placements during
the auction. Ads are then evaluated for
their relevance to the user's search or
the content that they're engaging with.
Quality score plays a key role here. As
it measures the ad overall quality,
Google then combines bid amount and
quality score to determine a final ad
rank. Finally, the highest ranking ads
are shown with their positions
determined by their ad rank and other
factors. To manage campaigns
effectively, Google also uses a
structured account setup. A Google
account is organised into campaigns, ad
groups, keywords, and ads. Each account
can include multiple campaigns such as
Campaign 1, Campaign 2, and so on.
Inside each campaign there are ad
groups. Remember ads set from Meta
where all the magic happens. Similarly,
in Google, they call it as ad groups,
which can organise your ads and
keywords. Each ad group contains
specific keywords and associated ads.
Once your account structure is set, the
next step is selecting the right
targeting options. Google Ads provides
several targeting options to help you
reach the right audience. Keywords are
specific words or phrases that trigger
your ads. Choosing the right keyword
means you will reach your users
actively searching for what you offer.
Tools like Google Keyword Planner can
help you identify relevant keywords for
your industry. Audiences allow you to
group individuals based on their
interests and behaviours on the
internet. For example, if you run an
online bookstore, a targeted audience
could be people who are interested in
books, literature can be very effective.
Then we have demographics. It helps you
narrow down your audience based on
factors such as age, gender, income,
and others. For example, if you sell
luxury watches, targeting high income
bracket people can be more effective
than a broad approach.
Finally, we have location targeting
that ensures your ads are shown to
specific geographic locations, which is
useful for local businesses trying to
attract customers from a particular
area like a country, city, or a town.
After defining the targeting, the next
step is choosing the right bidding
strategy. Google Ads offer various
bidding strategies depending on your
campaign goals. The strategies include
smart real-time automated strategies
such as maximising conversions with or
without a target CPA and maximising
conversion value with or without a
target OS or return on ad spend.
Automated strategies like maximise
clicks and target impression share are
also available. Similarly, Google also
offers manual bidding options like CPC
models. The final step is selecting the
bidding strategy that aligns with your
campaign goals. Choosing the right
strategy depends on what you're aiming
to achieve within your campaign. For
brand awareness, you might want to use
target impression share or maximise
clicks to drive traffic growth.
maximise clicks could be a good choice
for lead generation, our target CPU or
maximise conversions can be used. For
e-commerce sales, a targets or target
return on ad spend or maximise
conversions is often very effective. If
budget control is important,
manual CPC might be the best option for
high competition environment. Target
impression share
or target may be ideal.
