Hi again. Welcome to the next video. In
this section we will explore different
types of Google Ads campaign and their
specific purposes. Each campaign type
is designed to achieve different
marketing goals. The main types include
search, demand gen, discovery, and
performance max campaign in Google Ads
ecosystem. Let's start with search
campaigns. Google search ads appear
when users actively search for
information, product, or services.
These ads can include extensions such
as ratings, callouts, structure
snippets, and site links to provide
additional information. However, there
are specific guidelines to follow for
search ads. Words in all caps are not
allowed unless highlighting a
promotional code. The trick to click
phrases like click here are often
flagged. Only one exclamation point is
allowed, and none are permitted in the
headline. Additionally, the root domain
in their display URL must match the
destination URL. Search campaigns also
offer various bidding strategies
depending on your campaign goals.
Google Ads provides options aligned
with business objectives such as
conversion, leads, sales, clicks, views,
engagement, and impressions. Strategies
include targets, target CPA, maximised
conversions, maximised clicks, manual
CPC, CPMs, target impression share, so
on and so forth. That's aligned with
some of the use cases that businesses
are looking for to bid effectively on
Google Ads.
Broadly, there are two kinds of bidding
strategies on Google. One is smart
bidding that typically starts when you
have a little bit of clicks and
conversions already loaded on your
account, and then we have a manual
bidding option which typically uses
manual CPC model. Examples of smart
bidding could be target rowva or
maximise conversion value, or maximise
conversions or target CPA. And on the
other hand, manual bidding has models
like manual CPC.
Now let's move to another part of
search campaigns which is very critical,
that is keyword targeting.
Keywords in Google Ads are bucketed
into match types, and different match
types control when ads are triggered.
For example, match types like broad
match trigger ads for synonyms and
related searches, offering maximised
reach, but a little more restricted
relevance for businesses. On the other
hand, phrase match-based keywords
target ads for phrase and its close
variants, offering medium reach and
relevance for advertisers.
On the other hand, exact match target
ads for exact term and close variance,
providing maximum relevance. And
slightly restricted reach. Finally, we
have negative matches that prevent ads
from showing for particular searches
where business doesn't want their ad to
show up. Now let's move on to another
concept which is known as quality score,
which influences ad performance.
Quality score is nothing but a
combination of three factors, which
includes your landing page experience.
Your expected click through rate and
add relevance.
Landing page, experience and expected
CTR each contribute 39%, and add
relevance roughly contributes to 22%.
Next we have ad extensions which
enhance ads by providing additional
information and actions. Extensions
include site links, ratings, app links,
price details, promotion information,
click to call options, even location
data and phone numbers.
Each extension serves a specific
purpose, such as linking to a deeper
content, showing reviews, enabling app
downloads, displaying prices,
initiating calls, or providing location
details, or just putting on ad
disclosures.
With this, now let's move on to another
type of Google Ads campaign, which is
known as DemandGen campaigns. DemandGen
campaigns help advertisers reach users
across YouTube shorts, YouTube in
stream ads, YouTube in feed, Discover,
and even Gmail.
This kind of ads include multiple
assets such as image, headlines,
description, logos, call to action
buttons, URLs, and business names.
These campaigns are designed either to
re-engage with existing audiences or
help expand reach and target users
based on custom intent or remarketing
strategies. Demands and campaigns offer
advanced targeting options as well. You
can target audiences based on
demographics, affinity in market and
custom intent segments as well. So
what's an in-market audience? Imagine.
A regular car insurance buyer who buys
car insurance every year.
The algorithm knows she is already an
in-market audience because she has been
in the market and buying car insurance
year over year or month over month
versus there's something called a
custom intent. Like for example, if you
have if you have bought a new guitar
and if you have searched like what is
the best course for first-time guitar
learners, the algorithm buckets you as
a custom maintain because this is the
first time you have showed interest in
guitar or associated products.
Additional categories include weddings,
financial services, apparels,
electronics, education, real estate,
and even more.
Campaign structures may include. Add
groups for in market and custom intent
audiences.
Remarketing and even customer match.
Let's now look at discovery campaigns
on YouTube. Discovery campaigns use
video ads across YouTube with bidding
options like CPA or CPM. CPA is cost
per action, and CPM is cost per meal or
cost per 1000 impressions. First
category is known as true view or also
known as skippable in-stream ads. It is
the most popular format. These ads can
be skipped after 5 seconds, and
advertiser only pays if the viewers
continue watching post 5 seconds.
Other formats include non-skippable ads,
bumper ads, in-feed video ads, and
masters ads. Each format serves a
different purpose from awareness to
engagement and to broad reach. Now
let's see what each of these looks like.
Skippable ads allow viewers to skip the
ads after 5 seconds, while
non-skippable ads ensure you see the
full message at once. Then you have
bumpered ads which are usually 6
seconds long and cannot be skipped and
usually appears at the start of the
video.
Then you have in feed ads that appear
when users discover contents. Finally,
you have YouTube short ads which are
mostly on mobiles. Then you also have
something called master ads that
provide prominent visibility on
YouTube's home feed or the homepage,
like a big banner ad that shows up on
YouTube's homepage. Finally, let's
explore Performance Max campaign.
Performance Max campaigns allows
advertisers to run ads across YouTube,
display, search, discover, Gmail, and
maps from a single campaign. These
campaigns complement the keyword based
search campaigns and help increase
conversions across Google full range of
advertising inventory. By choosing the
right campaign type, search, demand gen,
or performance max, you can effectively
reach your audience, achieve your
marketing goals, and maximise the
impact of your Google Ads campaigns.
