Hello to all of you. My name is Dr. Hemant Radhor and we are in the course machine learning. We are in the module 13 association rule mining and this is the third video which is on the a priory algorithm. So the learning objective of this video are we are going to see how the a priory algorithm works with couple of examples. We will also look into the generation of the algorithm.
The generation of association rules based on pruning that can be done by a priory principle. So let's start right away. Let's quickly revise what is a priory principle. This we have discussed in the last video as well. So if an item set is frequent then all its subsets will also be frequent. If an item set is frequent all its subset must also be frequent. So for all x and y where x is equal to the same thing.
the subset of y the support of x will always be greater than and equal to support of y. Now through this we are calling it as anti-monotone property of support. We can also say that if an item set is infrequent. If an item set is infrequent all its superset will also be infrequent.
So if ab is infrequent. So if ab is infrequent abc will also be infrequent abd will also be infrequent and so on. Similarly if abc is infrequent then we can also say that abcd abce will also be infrequent and if abcd is infrequent then we can say abcde will also be infrequent. So all the supersets can be pruned with the help of a priory.
with the help of a priori principle. This we have discussed in the last class. So let's look into
the a priori algorithm now. So couple of terminologies. Lk is the candidate k item set.
So what is an item set? A set of items is called item set. k item set means an item set of cardinality
k. The number of items that can be stored that can be there in the item set should be k. Lk means
what are the candidate k item sets that can be used to generate association rules.
Similarly we have fk. fk is the frequent k item set. So from candidates those item sets which are
frequent in nature which satisfies the min support criteria will be called as frequent item set.
frequent k item set. Right. So initially let's suppose I am talking about one item set.
Right. So the set will contain items with the cardinality 1. Right. So there will be a set
right with cardinality 1 another set with cardinality 1 and so on. Now these are my candidates. Out of
these candidates some will follow or will be able to fulfill minimum support criteria. Others will not be able to minimum support criteria. So those we are going to discard. And the remaining which are frequent will be called as frequent k item set. Fk. Don't worry we will see a numerica and you will be able to visualize it very nicely.
So let's start with the algorithm. Right. We will start with k equals to 1. So the first step here is generate L1. Right. Candidate 1 item set. So if this is my data set. I will generate item sets of cardinality 1. For example.
a set with bread a set with milk a set with diaper and so on so all these are candidates with cardinal t1 and there can be many so l1 is done then step number two generate f1 from l1 so generate f1 from l1 based on minimum support so now once i have generated these item sets now i have to calculate
the support of each of these guys so for example bread is there one two three and four milk is there one two three four diaper is there one two three four right i assume minimum support is four so all these four are essentially we are saying these are frequent one item set let's take an example of coke as well another
one item set coke what is the support of coke one two so two coke is a infrequent item set and please note that based on a priory principle all the superset of coke will also be infrequent to even explore them coming back so first we have to generate l1 which is candidate one item sets then step number two is generate f1 from l1 based on minimum support
then we get into the loop loop loop the terminating condition is when fk becomes empty right that means the frequent item set right frequent k item set becomes empty just hold i will give you an example now inside that right we have four steps first is the candidate generation so we generate l k plus 1 which is l2 right so
we are going to generate l2 from fk which is f1 so from frequent one item set generate candidate two item sets right from frequent one item sets generate candidate two item sets then once we are done prune the candidate item sets lk plus 1 which is l2 containing based on
a priori principle right so for example i can generate two item set from bread because if bret is frequent then maybe its superset may be will also be frequent but if coke is infrequent all its superset will also be infrequent so i do not need to expand coke but i can expand bread right and so on just hold then the third step is support counting now
now once we have eliminated right now once we have eliminated the superset of coke and generated candidates for based on l1 or f1 now i am going to calculate the remaining support of remaining candidates right now once we are done with that once we have calculated the support of the remaining l2 right those l2 which are essentially infrequent based on minimum support i can discuss
now i will discard them to generate f2 and similarly we will iterate then i will generate l3 based on f2 right discard some candidates based on a priori principle then again compute the support again do the support counting based on minimum support and generate l3 based on f3 and so on right this is the loop just let me draw sort of a solver numerical in front of you so that you can able to understand
understand it easily so let's suppose someone has given me this dataset i have transactions and i have item set right i have four transactions t1 t2 t3 t4 and the items which are sold are abc in t1 a and c in t2 a and d in t3 and b e f in t4
yeah so this is my dataset i want to generate right association rules by looking at this dataset are two products associated with each other right can i put them together those things we want to derive assuming minimum support is two right and i am interested
in association rules where minimum confidence is greater than 75 percent right so minimum support is true that means at least the item should be sold two times and the confidence of the rule should be greater than 75 percent these are the two conditions i have been given by the domain expert so a priori algorithm we want to run here what is the step number one generate c1 candidate one item set so
we have to generate item sets with cardinalty one so how many candidates would be there one two how many unique items are there so these are the candidates one two three four five six right i have six candidates of candidate one item set six candidates of one item set okay now let me calculate the support of each guys
what is the support of each guys what is the support of each guys what is the support of a one two three what is the support of b one two what is the support of c two what is the support of d one e one and f one so by looking at candidate one item set i can say that a is the most sold item in the transaction log so a is the most sold item in the transaction log so a is
the most sold item is sold three times similarly b and c are sold two times and d e and f are sold only one times i know that minimum support is set as two that means by looking at the minimum support definition i can say that d e and f are infrequently sold these are infrequently sold so i am not interested in deriving any association rules based on d e and f association rules based on d e and f association
rules are derived for items which are derived for items which are frequently sold frequent item sets so based on minimum support condition i can discard right because d e and f are infrequently sold i can just discard them right so from c1 i have generated f1 frequent one item set which comprises of a b and c right which support
as three two respectively as three two respectively yeah so we are done till here right we have finished this first three steps now moving on i am going to generate l2 so i am inside the loop now i am going to generate l2 based on f1 candidate two item set based on frequent one item set right now why i am saying that based on the a priori principle i
can say that if d is infrequently i can say that if d is infrequent then all its superset will also be infrequent if e is infrequent all its superset will be infrequent so i do not even have to generate a candidate right out of d e or f i do not have to generate so a potential candidate can be d e if you see d what is the frequency of d e
frequency of d e support of d e is 0 so i do not even have to generate that based on a priori principle i can say that if d is infrequent all its superset may be d e or let's talk about d f right what is the frequency of d f again 0 maybe a d what is the frequency of a d again 1 right so if d is infrequent all its superset will also be infrequent i do not even have to generate these
right so the candidate generation right so the candidate generation right so the candidate generation now l2 will be based on f1 right frequent one item set so you will have different combinations here
a b you can have here so i am generating candidate two item set so ab ac and bc these are the three candidates
c yeah so these are the three candidates that can be derived from f1 based on a priori principle now so right so now i am done with the candidate pruning step next step support count calculate the support of each of these guys what is the support of ab 1 what is the support for ac 2 and what is the support for bc again 1
so by looking at this right so by looking at this right i know that ab do not satisfies min support criteria so this is infrequent i do not want to derive any rule from ab because it is infrequent ab is sold only one time similarly bc is also infrequent since it doesn't satisfy the min point criteria it is infrequent i do not want to derive any association
so only if i have to derive any association rule from bc as well right so only if i talk about l2 so this is l2 this is also l1 right l2 which is frequent 2 item set it would be ac right ac with support of 2 now i have to generate l3 oh sorry this is yeah this is l3 only
yeah this is l2 now i have to generate c3 this is c2 yeah so c3 i have to generate candidate 3 item set right so i have to generate it based on l2 candidate 3 should be generated by frequent 2 item set right now here you can see there are only 2 items so now this candidate 3 item set would
be empty i cannot have any other item here so i will stop the loop here now once i am done with that i know this is the frequent item set i have now i have to derive association rules from here now based on this item set which is ac there can be two rules i can derive a leads to the sales of c or c leads to the sales of a this is an item set right that means the bucket contain item a and item c and these two items
are frequently sold so i can derive two items are frequently sold so i can derive two rules from here a leads to the purchase of c or c leads to the purchase of a these are the two potential rules now which one is better i can calculate the confidence of each of these rules so confidence of these rules would be derived by the formula what is the formula support of so this becomes my x this becomes my y support of x union y divided by support of x
right this is the confidence formula so let's calculate the confidence so the confidence would be support of a union c support of a union c support of a union c is essentially 2 right divided by support of a which is 2 so this would be 100% and if i do this so support of a and c essentially is 2
support of a union c and support of a union c is 3 so this is 0.75 which is 75% and support of a union c here is again 2 divided by support of c which is 2 which is 100% so we can say that there are two rules right a leads to the purchase of c and c leads to the purchase of a there are two rules which one is better this rule is better
why because if c is bought there is a hundred percent chance that a will be bought
but if a is bought there is a 75 whatever 2 by 3 is 66 percent so if a is bought then there is a
66 percent chance that c will be bought so 1 2 and if a is bought there is no c here so out of
8 leads to purchase of c or c leads to the purchase of a is a better association rule so what we are saying is there are two candidate rules this rule is better because it satisfies the min confidence criteria as well right very simple but if you do it practice it couple of times you will be able to visualize it better right let's take one more example two examples so that you can understand it right so let's
suppose this is the transaction log given to me there are five transactions these are the items sold minimum support is three so what is the first thing we are going to generate we are going to generate c1 candidate one item set we are going to generate for example bread diaper only bread only diaper only beer only cook then we will calculate the support of each of these guys so first we will generate candidates one item set then i will count
supports and i will prune the candidates which do not satisfy the min support criteria. so the
min support criteria here is 3 right minimum support is 3 so coke and egg are infrequently
sold so that means they can be pruned that also means that any superset of coke or egg will also
be infrequent right so i have calculated c1 i have calculated l1 yeah candidate one item set and
frequent one item set now i have to generate c2 c2 will be generated based on l1 right frequent one
item set so for example we know that any superset of coke and egg will also be infrequent the candidates
which i am going to generate right will not contain any coke or egg right so based on combination of
bread and milk bread and beer bread and diaper i will have candidates here c2 here right now what i have
to do once i have done rated c2 now i have to calculate their support count their support by
looking at the transaction log so let me calculate the support of each of these guys right so support
of each of these guys are respectively shown here right so this is my c2 right first c2 was generated
based on l1 right and then i have calculated the support here once the support is counted i am going to
delete the candidates which are infrequent which doesn't satisfies the min support criteria min support
criteria is 2 so we are saying that bread and beer are infrequently sold beer and milk are infrequently
sold so I do not want to derive any association rules from them. We can also say that bread and
milk are frequently sold. Bread, beer and diaper are frequently sold. Diaper and milk are also
frequently sold with a frequency of 3. Right. Once this is done now I have to generate removing
these two this becomes my L2. Frequent 2 item set. Now I have to generate C3. Candidate 3 item
set. Candidate 3 item set will again be generated based on L2. Frequent 2 item set. So candidate 3 item set will be generated by frequent 2 item set. Right. So we know that bread and beer is infrequently sold. Any superset of that would not be present. Similarly beer and milk are infrequently sold. So any super of that also will not be there in the candidate 3 list. So we will have different combination of bread, milk, diaper,
and bread, milk, beer and so on. Right. So we can do various combinations here and these are my potential candidate 3 item set. Once that is done I am going to compute the support of each of these guys. How do I compute the support? Just I have to see how many times beer, diaper and milk are sold. So beer, diaper, beer, diaper, milk. One. Beer, diaper, milk.
Two times. Right. So this is 2. So I have to calculate the frequency. Right. Similarly I am going to do it for all the potential candidate 3 item sets here.
So let's suppose all these are coming to be 2, 2, 2, 1. Right. None of these satisfies the min support criteria. So that means any superset of any of these guys will also be infrequent. All of these are infrequent and any of superset of these guys will also be infrequent. So we are saying that L3 is infrequent.
L3 is empty. Since L3 is empty I will stop the loop. Right. When Fk is empty it will stop. So F or L this is I am using it interchangeably that is all fine. Right. So now I will stop. Okay. Now I have to derive association rules from 1, 2, 3 and 4. These are my candidate frequent item sets and I am going to generate
So we will talk about the rules from these. Right. So we will talk about the candidate rules and applying association principle here as well. So think about it. Let me talk about it. Now I have to derive association rules from 1, 2, 3 and 4 candidates. Right. There can be many combinations that can be generated. So let's talk about one potential case. Right. So let's suppose A, B, C, D is a frequent item set. Right. So bread and milk is a frequent item set. Right. So bread and milk is a frequent item set. Bread and diabetes are a frequent item set. Right. So bread and
Diaper is a frequent item set. From these I am going to derive association rule. So assuming A, B, C, D is a frequent item set. From this I can generate many association rules. As you saw earlier as well when we had A and C I was able to derive two association rules from it. They might not be very frequent but potential candidate association rules are two. So similarly a frequent item set with four cardinality
these are the potential candidate rules. Right. A, B, C leads to the purchase of D. A, B, D leads to the purchase of C and all these are my candidates. Now from these candidates I have to calculate the confidence of each of these guys. So we calculate the confidence of A tends to C. When C tends to A this came out to be 66 percent this come out to be 100 percent. So that is why we said that C tends to A is the better association rule. Right. So we have to calculate confidence of each of these guys. Right. So we have to calculate confidence of each of these guys.
which might be a computationally expensive exercise. Right. Which might be computationally expensive exercise. How can we sort of optimize it? I can again apply a priori principle here. So what is the a priori principle? Right. Think about it. If A, B, C, D. Right. Is a frequent item set. Right. I can write this equation. Which is confidence of A, B, C leads to the purchase of D. Will always be greater than confidence of A, B, C.
So confidence of B leads to the purchase of B leads to the purchase of C, D. Will always be greater than confidence of A leads to the purchase of C, D. Right. This I can write. How? Think about it. Let me just expand this. So confidence of A, B, C leads to the purchase of D can be expanded to support of A, B, C, D divided by support of A, B, C. Is greater than confidence of A, B, C.
So confidence of A, B, C, D. Right. So confidence of A, B, C, D. Right. So X union Y. X union Y. X union Y. X union Y. X union Y. Divided by support of X. Is greater than confidence of A, B, C, D. Divided by support of A. Numerator is same in all the terms. Denominator is different.
Now what is the relationship between denominator. If you look very carefully the relationship between denominator would be support of A, B, C will always be less than equal to support of A, B will always be equal to support of A. Right.
So by the A priori principle I should be able to say this. Right. And that is why we are able to derive this equation. So in association rule generation. Right. We look at the RHA side of the rule. If this is infrequent. If this is infrequent. Right. Or its superset will also be infrequent. Something like this. If A is infrequent.
So when this is infrequent. A, B is also infrequent. A, C is also infrequent. A, D is also infrequent. If A, B is infrequent. A, B, C is infrequent. A, B, C is infrequent. A, B, D is infrequent. And if A, C is infrequent. Then A, B, C, D is infrequent. Right. So I can derive association principle.
So I do not have to count confidence for any of these guys. Since I know this is doesn't satisfy the min confidence criteria. This doesn't satisfy the min confidence criteria. Right. Minimum confidence will not be applicable. These rules will also not be satisfying the minimum confidence criteria. So I can apply a priori principle on rule generation as well. Right. So this is what we are saying. Right. If A, B, C is infrequent.
So if A, B leads to the purchase of C, D has confidence below min confidence. Right. The confidence of A, B leads to the purchase of C, D is min confidence. Then I can also say that. Right. Any superset.
Any superset of A, C, D will also be do not satisfies the min confidence criteria for the rules. Right. So I can discard. I do not have to even count the confidence of this guy. Right. So this is a low confidence rule. And I can sort of prune these rules altogether. I don't even have to calculate their confidence. Right. So what is the formula or what is the flow chart of generating rule generations? Right. So first we generate.
altogether I don't even have to calculate their confidence right so what is the formula or what is the flowchart of generating rule generations right so first we generate h1 which is right where rhs is right one cardinality right based on minimum confidence criteria I will prune the rules which have right on the rhs right only one cardinality item right then h1
h2 will be generated based on h1 and we will repeat this iteration again and again till right all the rules are either generated or pruned right so this is the apriori algorithm very simple solve couple of numericals you will be able to visualize it very nicely the first example I was showing was done end to end why because given this sort of a data set I was able to say that if c is bought there is a 100% chance that a will be bought
right and we saw it in here as well right if c was bought there is a 100% chance that a was also bought right we saw this example as well here right however a leads to the purchase of c was not even better example because the confidence was 66%
so you can do so you can do so you can do so you can do so you can do similar sort of computation for this guy as well right this guy as well try to do that that's your homework so finally what are the problems with apriori algorithm apriori algorithm is a computationally exercise think about it when you are generating c1 I am scanning through the entire data set
right why to calculate the entire data set so c1 right candidate 1 item sets right when I want to generate their support right I want to count what is the support of a what is the support of b right I have to scan through the entire data set I am talking about millions of transactions
so to calculate the support of b right to calculate the support of b again you have to scan through the millions of transactions computationally expensive exercise right similarly right so a huge number of candidate sets if they are generated in early stages this might be computationally expensive exercise scanning the data sets databases is also very expensive exercise so what is the solution right we are not discussing that in this course but if you are interested
there is an algorithm called fp growth which reduces the scanning part which reduces this iterative scanning part repeated scanning part right so if you are interested you can look into this maybe we will see this algorithm in some advanced course so in summary in this video we talked about apriori algorithm we took couple of examples to understand how the apriori algorithm will work
end to end to end to end to end to end to end thank you for attending this class take care bye bye
