Hello to all of you. My name is Dr. Hemant Rathar and we are in the course Machine Learning. We are discussing Module 11 - Hierarchical Crusting. Today's video's topic is Introduction to Hierarchical Crusting.
So the learning objective of this video is, first we will define what is Hierarchical Crusting and then we will compare it with k-means crusting algorithm.
Then we will look into the two different types of Hierarchical Crusting algorithm, agglomerative and divisive.
Then we will look into the key output of Hierarchical Crusting which is the dendogram.
And then we will look into the primary strengths and weaknesses of Hierarchical Crusting.
So let's start right away.
So in the last module we were discussing about k-means crusting algorithm in detail.
Right? So if you remember, k-means crusting algorithm is a partition based hard clustering with all the steps needs to be run in a sequential fashion and the similarity computation is based on distance.
And it is a center based clustering algorithm.
And it is a center based clustering algorithm.
The input to k-means crusting algorithm are two.
One is data points which is n and the value of k.
How many partitions we want to find in the group?
How many clusters we want to find in the group?
This is k.
Right?
So k-means crusting algorithm cannot identify the optimal value of k on its own.
Right?
We need to pass it as an input parameter.
Let's take a very small example toy example.
Let's suppose this is my data set.
In k-means crusting algorithm, if I pass k=1.
Right?
k-means crusting algorithm will give me this cluster.
Right?
This is fine.
k-means crusting algorithm will run properly and give me this cluster.
If on the same data set, I pass k=2, then it might give me these two clusters.
Which is also fine.
If on the same data set, if I pass k=5, then it might start giving me different types of clusters.
For example, like this.
So finding a good value of k is extremely important in k-means crusting algorithm.
And we need to identify natural number of clusters in the data set.
So in ideal world, the optimal value of k in this data set is k=2.
Right?
So any value of k with k-means crusting algorithm will not give you any error.
It will just give you poor quality clusters.
And our aim or aim of any crusting algorithm is to find natural clusters in the data set.
And in this case, there are two natural clusters in the data set.
C1 and C2.
Now, here in this case, it's a two dimensional data set.
And that is why you are able to visualize what are the two natural clusters in the data set.
Right?
C1 and C2.
But if it is 100 dimensional data, then the visualization of natural clusters will be impossible.
We cannot do that.
Right?
So that becomes a big problem.
In a two dimensional data, you can visualize the natural clusters.
But if it is 100 dimensional data or 500 dimensional data, which it will be in real world situations,
finding, visualizing natural clusters would be extremely hard.
So then we have to move to a method where we have to see, once the cluster algorithm is run, we have to see what are the quality of clusters which are generated by the cluster method.
So we will come back to that in a minute.
So, in k-means crusting algorithm, one critical parameter which we need to pass in k-means crusting algorithm is the number of clusters we want to identify using the algorithm.
Right?
The algorithm, the k-means crusting algorithm cannot identify k on its own.
So then how do we find the natural numbers of clusters in the data set is a big question.
So, there are many approaches to find optimal or good value of k. We are discussing two approaches here.
One is called heuristic and the second one is called domain expertise.
So, heuristic means that I will run k-means crusting algorithm with a value of k and it will generate some clusters.
Once the clusters are generated, I am going to evaluate the quality of the clusters.
Right?
And then determine what is the optimal value of k or what is the good value of k.
This is called heuristic method.
The precise name of the method is called elbow method that we are going to see in the next slide.
Or we can take the help of domain expert.
Right?
A human expert.
Right?
To tell us what is the optimal value of k for a particular data set.
So, both these approaches are very real and used thoroughly in the real world as well.
So, let us look into heuristic method first which is called elbow method.
So, the aim is how do you find good value of k for a particular data set in k-means crusting algorithm.
That is our aim.
Right?
So, for that method one is called elbow method.
The elbow method actually generates a plot.
A two dimensional plot where x-axis is number of clusters various values of k and y-axis is SSC value.
Sum of square error.
Let me tell it is total SSC.
Right?
Total SSC value that you saw in module 10.
Right?
So, how does elbow method work?
It's very simple.
Given a data set, we pass k equals to 1 and run k-means on it.
Right?
Once the k-means execution is complete, we will get the total SSC value of the clusters.
Right?
So, in this case k equals to 1, there would be only one cluster.
We will have total SSC value.
Let's put that total, mark that total SSC value here.
Right?
Now, on the same data set, I will run with k equals to 2.
Right?
Again, k-means will run and it will generate two clusters.
Right?
And there will be a total SSC value as the output.
I will mark that total SSC value after k equals to 2 run and then I will mark it on the plot.
Similarly, I will run k-means with k equals to 3 on the same data set, k equals to 4 on the same data set, k equals to 5 on the same data set and so on.
And mark the SSC values.
Right?
As you can understand that as we increase the number of clusters in the data set, for example, let's take this twice in example.
k equals to 1.
So, k means we will identify all these points as one big cluster and then there would be SSC value.
That I am marking here.
On the same data set, now I will run k equals to 2 and it should ideally give me these two clusters.
Again, the total SSC value which is SSC value of this and SSC value of this will be added and will be marked here.
On the same data set, now I will run k equals to 3.
Right?
So, maybe it might give me this sort of clusters.
Right?
I will have total value of SSC that I will mark here.
Then I will run k equals to 4 and it might give me these clusters.
Okay?
Then I will note down the SSC value and that I will mark it here.
Right?
And so on.
Right?
So, in this way we are going to run with various values of k, note down the total SSC value and then draw a plot.
Right?
If you look very carefully at the plot, if I connect all the dots, it would look something like this.
Right?
So, if you look, it is like an elbow.
Right?
The optimal number of clusters are, right?
When you start from k equals to 1.
Right?
And start increasing the value of k, there would be sudden drop in the SSC value.
Right?
After a while, the SSC value will become stable.
Something like this.
Right?
So, at this point, initially the SSC value was decreasing drastically and then it became stable after a while.
So, optimal value of k in this case would be k equals to 5.
Right?
So, this is how we identify the optimal number of clusters in using elbow method for k-means-crustering algorithm.
Right?
It is very simple.
Now, let me ask a very simple question.
When do you think that this, right, in this case, SSC value would be 0?
Right?
In this case, at what value of k, the SSC value would be 0?
Think about it.
So, in this case, SSC value would be 0 when k will become n.
k equals to n.
Number of points equals to number of clusters.
That means, each point is a cluster, then SSC value would be 0.
Right?
So, this line will actually subside after a while with x-axis only.
Right?
And in that case, SSC value would be 0.
Right?
So, you got it, right?
We plot with different values of k.
Initially, the SSC value will sort of drop drastically and after a while it becomes stable.
So, at that juncture, right, at the elbow point, right, it will give me the correct value.
So, this is the correct value of, or optimal value of k.
Right?
Elbow method is one of the most common heuristic methods to find optimal value of k.
Let me tell you very clearly, this optimal value of k is not guaranteed in elbow method.
If elbow method is saying optimal value of k is 5, it doesn't guarantee it.
It is more of a help.
It is more of a sort of a heuristic, right?
That can say that, look, the optimal value is 5, but it does not always guarantee that the most optimal value would be 5 in a particular dataset.
So, it doesn't guarantee, let me tell, it doesn't guarantee the optimal number of values, optimal value of k, but it is more or less works fine in various cases.
Right?
So, that is why it is popular.
So, let me repeat again, elbow method does not always guarantee to find optimal value of k for k-meas-crested algorithm.
It is more of a heuristic that can help us in finding optimal value of k.
That value might not always be optimal.
Right?
So, the idea is plot the sum of square error, right, for range of values of k from k=1 to k=10.
Right?
Initially, SSE value will decrease.
As you increase the k value, SSE will decrease drastically, but after a point, it will decrease.
After a point, it will become stable.
Right?
So, after a point, the decrease in SSE value will become marginal and that means adding more clusters doesn't make sense.
At this point, we are saying that, right, the point of diminishing results look like more of an elbow in the graph.
Right?
It just look like mountain as well.
Right?
If you see, if this is a mountain, we are saying optimal value of k is here.
Right?
So, when you start from the top of the mountain, there is a steep decline.
But after a while, when it reaches towards the ground level, the slope will become very less.
So, at that point, we are saying the optimal value can be identified.
So, the optimal value would be here.
So, visualizing k means, right, the thing which I have discussed, I have now represented it in a proper way.
Right?
So, SSE value on y axis, k value on x axis and I will run with k equals to 1.
Same data set with k equals to 2, k equals to 3, k equals to 4, k equals to 5 and k equals to 6.
Initially, from k equals to 1 to k equals to 2, there is a steep decrease in the SSE value.
And then, it becomes more stable.
Right?
So, optimal number of clusters in this case, we can consider maybe 2 or 3.
There is no hard and fast rule here.
But the optimal value here can be, optimal value of k here can be 2 or 3.
Right?
Depending on my use case or a domain expert can help me now identifying that, okay, whether
to choose k equals to 2 or k equals to 3.
Right?
Elbow method is a plot between SSE and the number of clusters.
Initially, the SSE value is dropping drastically, then it flattens up.
We want to identify the elbow or the knee and that might come at 2 or 3.
Right?
So, that means 2 or 3 is a good choice for number of clusters.
Right?
What is the limitation with k-means clustering algorithm?
It is a heuristic based method.
It doesn't always guarantee to give you perfect number of clusters.
Right?
It doesn't guarantee.
Right?
It is more of a help.
Right?
And does not guarantee, right, always optimal number of clusters.
Sometimes, the elbow might not be visible.
Think about it this.
Right?
1, 2, 3, 4 and so on.
So, in this case, right, I cannot visualize, I cannot find a perfect value elbow location
here.
Right?
Because it is sort of gradually, right, gradually or sort of the SSE value is gradually coming
down.
The curve is much more smoother.
So, I am not able to find single point of inflection and that makes my identifying the optimal value
of clusters a bit hard.
Right?
So, that is the limitations with elbow method.
But let me tell you elbow method is very popular in various domains but it does not guarantee
always a perfect solution.
The second method to find optimal number of clusters is role of domain expert.
Right?
So, a domain expert by looking at the data set can tell me how many optimal numbers of clusters
are there in the data set.
Right?
For example, in the market segmentation example, right, a market expert, right, can look at
the data set and say that, okay, K=3 or K=4 or K=5 make much more sense, right, in terms
of business or it is more actionable.
Right?
So, a domain expert, right, based on her experience can tell us, right, what are the optimal number
of clusters in a particular data set.
Or, we can combine elbow method along with domain expertise, right, to take the final decision.
So, that is also very, very common.
Right?
So, elbow method is able to tell me that roughly in this case, K=2 and K=3 makes sense.
Now, a domain expert will further analyze whether K=2 is giving me proper natural clusters or
K=3 is giving me proper natural clusters and domain expert can help me identifying whether
to choose K=2 or K=3.
That can be a possibility.
So, this is how K can be identified in K-means Crusting algorithm.
Now, let's move to the next Crusting algorithm which is called Hierarchal Crusting.
Now, in Hierarchal Crusting, unlike K=3's Crusting algorithm, right, it is a Hierarchal Crusting
method.
It generates hierarchy of clusters.
That means, we do not have to pass the value of K.
It automatically identifies proper value of K. Again, a domain expert is required here as
well, but I do not need to pass K as a parameter in Hierarchal Crusting.
So, Hierarchal Crusting algorithms, right, are essentially used to generate a hierarchy of
clusters.
So, the core idea is it produces nested clusters where smaller clusters are successively merged
to form a bigger cluster and so on.
So, this might give me a nested structure which is just like a Hierarchal tree, right.
So, in this case, right, when we build Hierarchal clusters, right, we might not need a K value,
a priori, right, up front, right.
Based on the tree, I can find out the optimal value of clusters in the dataset.
So, we have discussed Hierarchal Crusting in the past as well.
Let me just give a small toy example again or repeat the toy example again.
Right, why Hierarchal Crusting might make a lot of sense.
So, for example, this example I have given you in the past as well.
We have Earth, right.
Earth is divided into 5 continents, Asia, Europe and so on.
Asia is further divided into countries, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh.
India is further divided into states, right.
So, for example, Goa, Delhi, Rajasthan, right.
Now, states are further divided into districts, North Goa, South Goa, Delhi will have districts,
Rajasthan will have districts.
Districts can further be divided into mahalas, right.
Now, this is a Hierarchal Crusting strategy, right.
The same sort of Hierarchy will be built here as well, right.
I am not drawing it, but as you can see, we can easily draw it.
So, this is a Hierarchy.
Now, for example, if this is my dataset,
I am at the top, Earth.
So, all the points belong to only one cluster, right.
Earth is essentially all the mahalas in the world, right.
I can divide Earth, right, based on continents, right.
So, I will cut this tree at this level.
So, how it will be represented here?
Now, I am going to divide this one big cluster into smaller clusters.
Maybe like this.
This is one small cluster.
This is another small cluster.
This is another small cluster.
And this is another small cluster.
Sort of.
Five smaller clusters, five continents, right.
I can further divide each of these smaller clusters into further smaller clusters, based on country.
So, cut the tree at this level, country.
So, let's suppose this is Indian cluster.
I will divide this Indian cluster based on now states.
So, I will divide this bigger Indian cluster into smaller states.
Right.
So, this.
I can divide this smaller states into districts and so on.
Right.
Now, the best part of this hierarchical questing is, in various domains, this hierarchy is applicable.
Right.
We can truly visualize this type of hierarchy in various domains.
See about this one.
It is very well applicable in this domain.
So, now the point is, how can we build the hierarchy?
How do we represent it?
What are the different parameters?
What are the optimization criteria?
What is the complexity?
All these things we are going to discuss in this hierarchical questing.
As you can understand, in hierarchical questing, we do not have to pass k.
How many clusters are natural clusters are in the data set.
Right.
What we have to pass it, is the set of points.
Right.
And the tree will be built.
Now, based on the question, I can say that, if someone asks me, how many continents are there?
I will cut this tree at this level and identify how many subclusters are there.
There are 5 subclusters.
So, optimal values of clusters in this case, in this hierarchy, is 5 when I cut it at continent level.
When I want to identify how many continents are there.
If I ask how many countries are there in Asia, I will cut at this level and this cluster will be broken down into smaller clusters.
So, I will count how many subclusters are there in the Asian cluster and then count it and that will give me how many optimal number of clusters are there at this level, at the country level, state level, district level and so on.
Right.
So, depending on my question, I can cut this hierarchy at various levels to get natural clusters.
So, natural clusters, as you can understand, if I ask how many continents, it makes sense to cut it at this level.
If I ask how many countries, it makes sense to cut it at this level.
If I ask how many states, it makes sense to cut it at this level and so on.
So, the earlier problem of K, right, how do you find the optimal value of K is not a problem in hierarchical questing.
K was a problem in K means questing algorithm where the solution can be elbow or domain expertise, but that is not at all a problem in hierarchical questing.
We can cut this tree at proper level based on the question and then that can give me natural, optimal natural clusters.
Right.
This type of taxonomy is applicable in, is meaningful in various domains.
We saw, we can see that in biological sciences, we saw another example and so on.
Right.
So, the key output of hierarchical questing is called dendogram.
Right.
The tree which I made, this is just that tree only in a more sort of a structured way I am representing.
It's just a tree.
Right.
The earlier tree.
The earlier tree.
This tree I am just representing in a proper form and this is my dendogram.
So, what is the dendogram?
The output of hierarchical questing can be visualized using a tree like structure which is called dendogram.
A tree like structure which is called a dendogram.
So, a dendogram is a tree like diagram that records the sequence of merges and split.
That records the sequence of merges and split.
Hold on.
I will talk about that in a minute.
Right.
So, I can build this tree from bottom up approach using a bottom up approach or a top down approach.
Right.
Both the ways it is applicable.
Right.
Now, on y-axis, this tree on y-axis typically we write distance or SSE value or dissimilarity value.
Right.
Y-axis can be any of these.
Right.
Depending on my use case I can plot distance.
I can plot SSE value.
Y-axis can be dissimilarity.
X-axis are the data points.
So, initially let's build this tree.
Initially, right.
We start with each point is a cluster.
A single point cluster.
So, this is a cluster which contain only one point which is point one.
This is cluster two or cluster three with one cluster with one point which is three.
Right.
Based on similarity, I can merge the two clusters.
Now, let's suppose here I am plotting SSE value.
So, initially when each point is a cluster in itself, the SSE value, the total SSE value
would be zero.
If the point itself is a cluster, right, the SSE value would be zero.
The distance between point and the centroid would be zero.
So, SSE value is zero.
So, in this case, right, you can see SSE value of these points are zero.
Now, based on some sense of similarity, let's suppose I merge the two most similar clusters.
The two most similar clusters were one and three.
So, I merge them.
So, as you can see, SSE value might increase a bit, right, because initially this was one
point, this was another point.
Now, I merge them.
So, the center will come here and the SSE value would be this distance and this distance,
square and then summation, right, as you can understand.
Okay.
Now, next I merge the two most similar clusters.
So, SSE value would be further high because, right, initially these are more dissimilar.
That is why when I merge them, the SSE value is higher.
Then, similarly, I am going to merge most similar clusters iteratively to form a tree-like structure.
So, at the top, there will be only one cluster, big cluster which will have all the points,
one, three, two, all the points.
And then, the SSE value of that cluster would be the highest, as you can understand.
Right.
So, dendogram is a tree-like structure.
So, how do we read dendogram?
We can start from the root or leaf of the tree.
We can start from the leaf of the tree and we will merge the nodes which are most similar.
Merge the two clusters, right, each data point is a cluster.
I will merge the two most similar clusters.
When I merge them, right, the SSE value will increase and that I am noting down.
Right.
At the top, when I iteratively merge the clusters, at the top I will have only one cluster and which will have the highest SSE value and that we are noting down here.
Right.
So, SSE value is, let's suppose, 0.2 here.
Right.
So, on the y-axis I can plot, right, the distance.
Sometimes I plot SSE value.
I can plot diameter.
I can plot radius.
There are various things which I can plot here.
Right.
In different literatures you will see different use cases, different values can be plotted here.
But this is more of an error we are plotting.
Right.
SSE value is an error.
Distance is an error.
Radius is an error.
Diameter is an error.
So, typically we plot error on the y-axis.
On the x-axis, the data parts.
Right.
So, now, please note down.
Right.
The tree we were cutting at various level, now we can cut dendogram at various level.
How can we do that?
Initially, each point is a cluster.
So, k value is 12.
Right.
12 points k value is 12 and the height of the tree is 0 or ssc value of the tree is 0 when i sort of
start merging the two more similar clusters right at this level k equals to 8 i get a natural insight
so i can cut dendogram at this level and say that the natural clusters are this this this this this
this and this there are eight clusters so at various level i can cut the dendogram and get the
desired result right i can get the desired result right so basically to build this dendogram we'll
come back to this don't worry i'm just explaining this right right now from the top right so there
are two broad ways of building this dendogram one is called bottom-up approach which we broadly saw
earlier where we start with when each point is a cluster on its own and based on similarity notion
based on closeness notion i will merge the two most similar clusters until we have one big cluster at
the top right and this is most commonly used approach or i can build a dendogram or tree based on divisive
approach which is called top down top down means initially all the data points belong to one big
cluster and based on some notion of dissimilarity i will start breaking the clusters till each point is a
cluster at the end at the leaf right so both these approaches we are going to see in next few videos
and so on so agglomative question which is called bottom-up approach we start with each point is a
cluster and based on similarity notion i'm going to merge the clusters we repeat it until we have one big
cluster towards the top at the root on the other hand right so for example if this is a data set right if this is a
data set there are five data points
yeah so if i'm doing
bottom-up bottom-up each data point is a cluster i will merge two most similar clusters so a and b are merged
then two most similar clusters are merged d and e are merged then two most similar clusters are merged so c d e are
merged and then finally i have one big cluster at the root we start with each point is a cluster and we iteratively
merge the most similar clusters to form a one big cluster towards the root right so this is called bottom-up
approach left to right is called bottom-up approach and if i follow from right to left this is called top-down approach
so initially
i will start with one big cluster based on some notion of dissimilarity i will break this based on some notion of dissimilarity i will break some bigger cluster based on some notion of dissimilarity i will break it till each point is a cluster in itself till each cluster contain only one point right so top-down as i was saying one big cluster with all n points iteratively break that big cluster based on some notion of dissimilarity between point and we break it till each cluster with all n points iteratively break that big cluster based on some notion of dissimilarity between point and we break it till each cluster with all n points.
so we can follow this right so we can follow this right and this is how we visualize it so in summary in this video we talked about why hierarchical clustering makes sense if we do not know the optimal number of clusters hierarchical clustering is a big cluster.
hierarchical clustering is a nested structure of clusters and can be visualized very easily with the dendogram a tree lake structure called dendogram.
we do not have to specify in hierarchical clustering what are the optimal number of clusters we can cut the dendogram at various levels to find the natural number of clusters and hierarchical clustering can be built using bottom-up approach which is called agromative method or a top-down approach which is called divisive method.
we will see both of these in next few videos thank you for attending take care bye bye.
