Welcome learners. Let's go through some
core concepts before we get into hands
on implementation.
So what is a text corpus? In natural
language processing, a text corpus is a
large, structured collection of text
data used to study, analyse and model
language. So what is the size of a
corpus? A corpus is more than a single
document.
More than a folder of text files.
And the corpus is carefully collected
to represent language usage. Let's look
at some examples of text corpus. A
collection of books can be a text
corpus. A popular example is the
Gothenburg corpus. News articles across
categories can also be a text corpus,
brown corpus being a popular example.
Movie reviews with labelled sentiment
for sentiment analysis can be a text
corpus. Question answer pairs used for
comprehension tasks, or QA modelling
can also be a text corpus. So when we
say we train an NLP model, what we
really mean is that we train a model on
a text corpus.
Let's understand this further. A
document is a single unit of text.
Example of document.
One book, an article, a review, whereas
Corpus is a collection of documents,
500 books, a million reviews. Finally,
a data set. A corpus that is organised
for a specific task, often with labels,
is called a data set,
example sentiment analysis data set,
NER data set, and so on.
Finally, In natural language processing,
corpora provides language, whereas data
sets provide supervision. What's the
importance of text corpus in NLP? NLP
systems do not understand language the
way humans do. Machines only understand
zeros and ones. They learn patterns,
statistics, and distributions from
these text corpus. Everything we do in
natural language processing depends on
the corpora. For example,
TFIDF depends on word frequencies. Word
embeddings depend on word cooccurrence.
Topic models depend on document word
distributions.
And language models depend on sequence
patterns. The bottom line is Any change
in corpus? Will change the model's
behaviour. Remember, garbage corpus
will lead to a garbage model. And so
goes the famous saying.
Garbage in, will lead to garbage out.
Here M represents the model.
Human language is more statistical and
not rule based. Traditional linguistics,
whereas modern NLP focuses on usage
patterns, for example, the word bank
could mean. A river bank or a financial
bank? Models disambiguate meaning not
from rules, but from how the words
appear together, how frequently they
appear. And the context in which they
appear, all of this comes only from the
corpus.
That's all for this video. I'll see you
in the next one. Thank you.
