PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
 
 
 
UNIT –IV: Sampling and Testing of Hypothesis for Large Samples 
 
Sampling: Definitions - Types of sampling - Expected values of sample mean and variance, 
Standard error - Sampling distribution of means and variance. Estimation - Point estimation 
and Interval estimation. 
 
Testing of hypothesis: Null and Alternative hypothesis - Type I and Type II errors, Critical 
region - confidence interval - Level of significance, One tailed and Two tailed test. 
 
Large sample Tests: Test of significance - Large sample test for single mean, difference of 
means, single proportion, and difference of proportions. 
 
Unit-V: Testing of Hypothesis for Small Samples 
 
Small samples: Test for single mean, difference of means, paired t-test, test for ratio of variances 
(F-test), Chi- square test for goodness of fit and independence of attributes. 
 
Suggested Text Books: 
i) 
Fundamental of Statistics by S.C. Gupta, 7thEdition,2016. 
ii) 
Fundamentals of Mathematical Statistics by SC Gupta and V.K.Kapoor 
iii) 
Higher 
Engineering 
Mathematics 
by 
B.S.Grewal, 
Khanna 
Publishers, 
35thEdition,2000. 
 
 References: 
i) 
Introduction to Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists by 
Sheldon M.Ross. 
ii) 
Probability and Statistics for Engineers by Dr. J. Ravichandran.  
 
Course Outcomes: After learning the concepts of this paper the student will be able to          
            independently  
1. Evaluate randomness in certain realistic situation which can be either discrete or 
continuous type and compute statistical constants of these random variables.  
2. Provide very good insight which is essential for industrial applications by learning 
probability distributions. 
3. Higher up thinking skills to make objective, data-driven decisions by using correlation and 
regression. 
4. Assess the importance of sampling distribution of a given statistic of a random sample. 
5. Analyze and interpret statistical inference using samples of a given size which is taken from 
a population. 
