PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
 
 
 
  Preface  
     Education in mathematics forms the basis of science and engineering from undergraduate to 
graduate level, because engineering and science are largely based on mathematical modelling. The 
level and the quality of mathematics education sets the level of the education as a whole. 
      Our aim is to develop a complete program for mathematics education in science and 
engineering from basic undergraduate to graduate education. This includes several courses like  
o Mathematics I  
o Mathematics II  
o Mathematics III  
o Probability and Random Processes  
o Probability and Statistics 
These courses are introduced at different levels/semesters of the engineering program some being 
common and some based on the branch/specialization chosen by the student. 
        The purpose of these courses is to arm the student with the necessary ideas and methods, so 
that when mathematical elements appear in other courses and research work, one can tackle them 
with confidence, possibly with further independent study into specialized areas. Its major role is 
to summarize, crystallize, enhance and give a forward orientation to the mathematical methods 
taught in undergraduate curriculum, with projections to future requirements. 
Common Features of the Mathematical Courses: 
 
The courses are based on a synthesis of mathematics, computation and application. 
 The courses are designed basing on new interests and needs of the current scenario, giving 
a new united presentation from the start based on constructive       mathematical methods 
including a computational methodology. 
 These courses are designed at different levels of ambition concerning both mathematical 
analysis and computation, while keeping a common basic core. 
 These courses increase the motivation of the student by applying mathematical methods 
to interesting and important concrete problems right from their introduction. 
 While emphasis may be put on problem solving, these courses gives theoretical and 
computational methods and builds confidence. 
 The course contains most of the traditional material from basic courses in analysis, linear 
algebra, applied mathematics and higher engineering mathematics. 
 Emphasis is put on giving the student a solid understanding of basic mathematical 
concepts. 
