PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
36
 
 
 
CORRELATION AND REGRESSION 
CORRELATION 
Introduction 
In a bivariate distribution and multivariate distribution, we may be interested to find if there is any 
relationship between the two variables under study. Correlation refers to the relationship between 
two or more variables. The correlation expresses the relationship or interdependence of two sets 
of variables upon each other.  
Definition Correlation is a statistical tool which studies the relationship b/w 2 variables & 
correlation analysis involves various methods & techniques used for studying & measuring the 
extent of the relationship b/w them. 
Two variables are said to be correlated if the change in one variable results in a corresponding 
change in the other. 
The Types of Correlation 
1) Positive and Negative Correlation: If the values of the 2 variables deviate in the same 
direction 
 i.e., if   the increase in the values of one variable results in a corresponding increase in the values 
of othervariable (or) if the decrease in the values of one variable results in a corresponding 
decrease in the values of other variable is called Positive Correlation. 
e.g. Heights & weights of the individuals If the increase (decrease) in the values of one variable 
results in a corresponding decrease (increase) in the values of other variable is called Negative 
Correlation. 
e.g, Price and demand of a commodity. 
 
2) Linear and Non-linear Correlation:The correlation betweentwo variables is said to be 
Linear if the corresponding to a unit change in one variable there is a constant change in the other 
variable over the entire range of the values (or) two variables𝑥, 𝑦are said to be linearly related if 
there exists a relationship of the form y = a + bx. 
e.g when the amount of output in a factory is doubled by doubling the number of workers.  
Two variables are said to be Non-linear or curvilinear if corresponding to a unit change  
   in one variable the other variable doesnot change at a constant rate but at fluctuating rate. 
i.eCorrelation is said to be non-linear if the ratio of change is not constant. In other words,  
when all the points on the scatter diagram tend to lie near a smooth curve, the correlation is    
  saidto be non-linear (curvilinear). 
 
3) Partial and Total correlation: The study of two variables excluding some other 
variablesis called Partial Correlation. 
e.g. We study price and demand eliminating the supply.  
   In Total correlation all the facts are taken into account. 
e.g Price, demand &supply ,all are taken into account. 
 
4) Simple and Multiple correlation:When we study only two variables, the relationship is  
described as Simple correlation.  
E.g quantity of money and price level, demand and price.  
 
 
 
