PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
 
 
 
MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING & TECHNOLOGY 
 
 B. TECH- II- YEAR- I-SEM                                                                                       L /T/P/C 
                                                                                                                                         3 / - /- / 3 
(R20A0024)PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS 
(Common to CSE, IT) 
Course Objectives:  
 
1. To identify a random variable that describes randomness or an uncertainty in certain 
realistic situation. It can be either discrete or continuous type. 
2. To learn important probability distributions like: in the discrete case, study of the Binomial 
and the Poisson Distributions and in the continuous case the Normal Distributions. 
3. To build the linear relationship between two variables and also to predict how a dependent 
variable changes based on adjustments to an independent variable. 
4. To interpret the types of sampling, sampling distribution of means and variance, 
Estimations of statistical parameters. 
5. To give comprehensive knowledge of probability theory to make inferences about a 
population from large and small samples. 
 
UNIT – I: Random Variables 
 
Single Random Variables -Discrete and Continuous, Probability distribution function, 
Probability mass and density functions, mathematical expectation and variance. 
Multiple Random variables: Discrete and Continuous, Joint probability distribution, Marginal 
probability density functions, conditional probability distribution function and density 
functions. 
 
UNIT-II: Probability Distributions 
 
Binomial distribution – properties, mean, variance and recurrence formula for Binomial 
distribution, Poisson distribution – Poisson distribution as Limiting case of Binomial distribution, 
properties, mean variance and recurrence formula for Poisson distribution, Normal distribution 
– mean, variance, median, mode and characteristics of Normal distribution. 
 
UNIT -III: Correlation and Regression 
 
Correlation -Coefficient of correlation, Rank correlation, Regression- Regression coefficients, 
Lines of regression. 
Multiple correlation and regression- Coefficient of multiple Correlation, multiple regression, 
multiple linear regression equations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
