PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMANITIES & SCIENCES 
©MRCET (EAMCET CODE: MLRD) 
51
 
 
 
SAMPLING 
Introduction:  
The totality of observations with which we are concerned, whether this number be finite or 
infinite constitute population. In this chapter we focus on sampling from distributions or 
populations and such important quantities as the sample mean and sample variance. 
 
Definition: Population is defined as the aggregate or totality of statistical data forming a subject 
of investigation.  
Example: The population of the heights of Indian. 
       The number of observations in the population is defined to be the size of the population. It    
       may be finite or infinite. Size of the population is denoted by N. As the study of entire  
       population may not be possible to carry out and hence a part of the population alone is    
       selected. 
Definition: A portion of the population which is examined with a view to determining the 
population characteristics is called a sample.  In other words, sample is a subset of population. 
Size of the sample is denoted by n. 
The process of selection of a sample is called Sampling. There are different methods of sampling 
 Probability Sampling Methods  
 Non-Probability Sampling Methods 
Probability Sampling Methods: 
a) Random Sampling (Probability Sampling): 
It is the process of drawing a sample from a population in such a way that each member 
of the population has an equal chance of being included in the sample.  
Example: A hand of cards from a well shuffled pack of cards is a random sample. 
Note: If N is the size of the population and n is the size of the sample, then  
 The no. of samples with replacement = 𝑁௡ 
 The no. of samples without replacement = 𝑁஼೙ 
b) Stratified Sampling : 
In this , the population is first divided into several smaller groups called strata according 
to some relevant characteristics . From each strata samples are selected at random, all the 
samples are combined together to form the stratified sampling. 
c) Systematic Sampling (Quasi Random Sampling): 
In this method , all the units of the population are arranged in some order . If the population 
size is N, and the sample size is n, then we first define sample interval denoted by = 
ே
௡ . 
then from first k items ,one unit is selected at random. Then from first unit every kth  unit 
is serially selected  combining all the selected units constitute a systematic sampling. 
Non Probability Sampling Methods: 
a) Purposive (Judgment ) Sampling : 
In this method, the members constituting the sample are chosen not according to some 
definite scientific procedure , but according to convenience and personal choice of the 
individual who selects the sample . It is the choice of the individual items of a sample 
entirely depends on the individual judgment of the investigator. 
b) Sequential Sampling: 
It consists of a sequence of sample drawn one after another from the population. 
Depending on the results of previous samples if the result of the first sample is not 
acceptable then second sample is drawn and the process continues to take proper decision 
. But if the first sample is acceptable ,then no new sample is drawn. 
 
