Hi again, and welcome to the video on
introduction to Meta ads. In this video,
we'll explore what meta is, the
platforms that fall under the meta
ecosystem, and why meta ads have become
such an essential part of our modern
day digital marketing. But before we go
ahead, let me introduce you to the meta
advertising standards. Think of this as
the key principles and guidelines that
shape how ads are created and approved
across meta platforms. In this section,
you will learn what advertisers must
follow to ensure the ads remain clear,
safe, compliant, and fully aligned with
Meta's policies. Let's look at some of
the key principles and the areas that
it covers. We'll start with clickbet,
followed by engagement bet. We'll also
cover meta stance on low quality links,
misleading content, and deceptive
actions. Finally, we will look at
content ownership. Together these
components and principles help maintain
a trustworthy and high quality
advertising environment across meta ad
platforms. Moving on to the next, we
will also look into the next set of
principles which covers areas such as
nudity, sexual activity, violence and
criminality, bullying and harassment,
and also hate speech. Will also cover
violent and graphic content,
self-injury, and associated meta
guidelines that support journalists'
safety. Together these standards ensure
that ads remain respectful, responsible,
and safe for all audiences and users in
Meta's environment. With this, we will
now look into the different types of
engagement betting that Meta
discourages as per their advertising
standards. So we'll start with
something called react betting. You
might have seen some of the posts where
people asked to use specific reactions
to boost visibility, so this kind of
content is not encouraged as per meta's
advertising standards, and those kind
of ads might get disapproved by metas,
policies, and AIs. Next is comment
betting, which pushes users to comment
on certain words or phrases just to
artificially increase engagement. Again,
this is against the Meta's standard
advertising policies, and there's a
high chance this kind of ads will be
taken down by Meta. Then we have share
betting, where users are encouraged to
share a post in order to enter a
contest or help a post reach more
people. Again, as I mentioned, these
kinds of content are not allowed as per
their advertising policies. Next one is
tag betting. Posts push people to tag
their friends just to increase reach,
even when the content is not truly
relevant to them. These kind of things
are again not approved on Meta's
advertisement standards. And finally,
vote betting, where users are
encouraged to vote by clicking,
reacting, or selecting an image purely
to drive artificial engagement. Those
kinds of ads are also taken down by
Meta's AIs. All these tactics
manipulate engagement and strictly go
against Meta's advertising standards.
Then moving on to the next one, which
is click beets. Click beets are nothing
but headlines that may attract
attention, but they can damage
credibility if used incorrectly.
Something like this which says first,
don't withhold key information, a
headline like You will never believe
who Tripped and who fell on the red
carpet leaves out important details
like what happened and who tripped.
This creates frustration and reduces
trust again this kind of Advertisement
content is highly discouraged by Meta's
standard advertisements policies.
Second, don't exaggerate or sensitise
your headlines. A headlines like Apples
are actually bad for you, can mislead
readers and distort the real message,
especially when the truth may simply be
apples are only hurtful if you eat too
many a day. Something which is not
universally true. That is not
encouraged by Meta's advertisement
policies. So what should we do? Instead,
aim for headlines that are clear,
accurate, and informative while still
engaging in a good and meaningful
manner with the reader. By this point,
you might be thinking, is engagement
bet always bad? The answer is
definitely not. In some of the cases,
meta has some few exceptions, but it
allows some of the bets to run as ads.
While engagement bets posts are used to
push content that isn't meaningful,
some posts actually provide real value.
For example, a post or ad content that
helps circulate a missing child report,
raise money for a cause, or ask the
community for travel tips. This kind of
posts or advertisements create
authentic engagement, and Meta takes
extra care to make sure they aren't
impacted by their AI and machine
learning models and they aren't taken
down immediately. Now let's look at
some of the meta's restricted ad
content policies. Think of these as the
categories of ads that are allowed, but
only under strict conditions and with
proper permission. First is alcohol.
Ads promoting or referencing alcohol
must follow all local laws, industry
guidelines, and age restrictions. In
some countries, alcohol-related ads are
not allowed at all, so meta follows
that particular geography or
country-wise local laws. Next is online
dating. Ads related to online dating
services require prior written
permission and must comply with Meta's
dating guidelines and also that
particular countries or local laws.
Then there is real-time money gambling.
Any ad that involves real money games
of skill or chance, including lotteries,
sports betting, must be approved in
advance and only can target people in
those approved regions where local laws
permit those activities. Next is
promotion over the counter drugs. Ads
that promote OTC or over the counter
medicines must comply with all the
applicable local laws and the local
restrictions, as well as established
industry codes, guidelines, licences,
and approvals. They must also follow
proper age and country targeting
requirements in line with applicable
local regulations. And finally,
cosmetic procedures and weight loss
promotions. Ads that market weight loss
products or services must be targeted
only to people who are at least 18
years old. Likewise, ads promoting
cosmetic surgeries and procedures must
be directed to audiences who are also
18 years of age or older. Advertisers
must ensure these promotions are
responsibly targeted and comply with
all applicable local advertisement
guidelines. These rules or principles
help ensure that sensitive ad
categories are advertised more
responsibly and in line with regional
regulations. You can read more about
Meta's advertisement policies standards
by visiting their official transparency
page. You can go to
transparency.meta.com/policy/adstandards
and read about other various categories
as well.
