Let's understand meta ads business
manager, as they call us, ads manager.
So if you go to. Meta adds business
manager. This is how the initial screen
looks like. For the first time, you
might have to sign up with your
Facebook or Instagram account. Uh, so
I've already signed in over here. I'll
just directly go and click on, go to
Ads Manager.
So once I click over here.
The dashboard opens up.
Before we get into the dashboard, a
real quick recap about how metals ads
are structured.
So we already talked about how the meta
ads structure is placed. First, at the
first level we have campaign level,
then we have the ads set level, and
then finally we have the ad level. What
is a campaign? Level, a campaign is the
topmost level of your ads. When you
create a new campaign, Meta will always
ask you for an objective, like what's
the ad is all about. So that Meta's
algorithm can decide how to distribute
that money.
So, objectives, again, uh, there is
objective for traffic, you want to
drive traffic to your website, or it
could be engagement, you want to drive
views to your Instagram reels or other
ways. There are leads where you can
collect information, uh, user
information based on whatever they
input, or if you want to promote your
app.
And the next level, there is adset. At
the asset level, the most important
setting
is what you define via your audience
targeting, placement targeting, or
regional targeting. For example, if you
want to target a particular location, a
particular demographic like people who
love designer clothing or women's
clothing, everything falls into adset.
So remember in Meta's ad structure, the
whole magic happens in the adset level.
So these are the some few examples that
you can
use as a targeting options on an asset
level on meta. And finally, the ad,
which is pretty straightforward, uh, an
ad is everything your audiences will
get to see when your campaigns are live.
It could be a video image or any other
form of, uh, advertisement like a
cadozal cards also.
So this is an example of a meta and
Instagram ad. So now we know all the
basics, we'll get into the account, so
this is, as I mentioned, how the
account looks like. We'll click on
campaigns.
OK, let's create a new campaign over
here. So first thing it says, what's
the buying type that we want to use.
First option is auction or reservation.
Auction is, it's get into a real-time
auction, but reservation is you kind of
pre-decide or kind of pre-set a budget
for a specific time. And as you can
imagine, reservation adds a slightly
higher expensive and auction is a
little more cost effective. So we'll go
with a real-time auction over here.
Let's click on auction, and then at a
campaign level, it will ask me what's
my campaign objective, uh, whether it's
awareness, driving traffic to my
website or engagement, whether it's
video views or post engagement,
whatever it could be, so on and so
forth. Let's suppose my objective is to
drive traffic to my website. Or maybe
it could be Instagram profiles as well,
so let's click on that traffic.
Click on continue.
OK. So now, again, it gives me two
options. Uh, it Say like, hey, you know,
let an AI decide your targeting, or you
can use a manual option over here. For
the learning purposes, let's suppose
we'll go with the manual option.
Let's click on continue.
OK. This is how things will look like.
It will ask you to give a campaign name.
You can give any campaign name. Let's
suppose it's called a test campaign.
OK, so the buying type is auction.
Campaign objective is traffic. Now it
will ask me to set a budget. Either I
can set a budget at the adset level,
which is the second layer, or the first
layer. For the simplicity, let's
suppose we'll go with campaign budget.
Then it will ask me whether I want to
use a daily budget or a lifetime budget.
Daily budget is basically I can choose,
like I will spend, let's suppose, ₹100
a day. Or I can say a lifetime budget,
which is basically, I will run this
campaign for the next 7 days, and let's
suppose I'll put a budget of ₹10,000
right? So I can choose anything. Let's
suppose we'll go with a daily budget of
₹100.
OK, now, uh, let's.
Scroll down. So some special ad
categories is basically if your
advertisements falls under financial
products or services, employment,
housing or social issues, you have to
kind of give a disclaimer to Meta, like,
hey, this, my ad is under a special
category. Let's suppose in our case
it's not, we'll move forward.
OK, remember from the campaign level,
now we are at the adset level, the
three-tiered structure that we kind of
talked over here, campaign, asset, and
ad. So right now we are at the adset
level.
So what happens in asset level? Um, it
basically talks about where do I want
to drive my, uh, profile visits,
whether it's a website or Instagram or
Facebook page, or whatever that is,
let's suppose it's a website.
Performance goal. My performance goal
is maximum number of landing page views
that I want.
Let's scroll down. Attribution is
something we'll talk at the end of our
session, like, uh, when we are in week
12 or week 13. Uh, right now you can go
with standard attribution model. Uh,
attribution is basically how meta
understands, uh, you know, how the
conversions or clicks has to be
attributed or given the credit for, but
we'll talk more about in week 12 or
week 13.
OK, uh, then.
We have already set the budget and all
those things. We can put a start date
or an end date. Since we have put our
daily budget, so our start date is
enough, we can anytime in the campaign.
OK, then it comes audience controls, uh.
And the placement control, you can
choose your placement. Uh, if you don't
want to show your ad, let, let's post
on the Facebook right column, you can
just uncheck it.
In our case, there's no such thing.
OK, so we'll come to advantage plus
audiences, and over here, we can start
editing the age group that we want to
target. So for example, imagine if you
are showing an ad for a woman apparel,
uh, so maybe on the genders, you just
want to show women and age you want to
edit, let's suppose people from 25 to
35.
OK, let's oppose gender is women only.
Now, detailed targeting, this is what
people have been, uh, you know, looking
at Instagram or Facebook. You can
target those specific interest-based
people. So for example, let's suppose
women.
Clothing.
So you can add that, or people who love
online shopping, so on and so forth. So
you can decide what kind of audiences
you want to target and you can keep
adding over here.
Yeah, so this is what the asset level
is, where you set your audience
targeting, you set your start date and
end date, uh, age, gender, all the
demographic changes that you do over
here. Again, if you're running some
special category advertisements like
finance, stock market trading, and so
on, so you have to just mark it as yes.
In our case it's not, so we'll skip
this. So any ads which is related to
securities and investments, you have to
just put a disclaimer, but right now we
are not in that category, so we'll skip
that and we'll click next.
OK, so once this is done,
We have to connect our page, like the
Facebook page and the Instagram account.
You can just click on create page. If
you don't have it, or if you have it,
you know, it will just show, your page
will automatically be shown up over
here and you have to just click on
connect.
OK, uh, with that, this is where the ad
comes up. Uh, we have already learned
the various forms of ad, like a single
image or a video or a colossal ad, and
so on and so forth in our earlier
videos. So let's suppose that for the
learning purposes, we'll just use
single image or video over here. You
can put the website URL over here,
let's say www.abc.com, whatever that is.
You can put it over here, even, even
you can put a WhatsApp button uh link
in your, uh, web link as a web link
over here.
OK. So once you do that, you can click
on add preview and upload all your uh
images or videos over here and connect
your Facebook page and Instagram page.
Either, it can fetch all your existing
Facebook posts or Instagram post and
suggest you options, or you can
manually upload it. Once you are done,
click on publish.
So it will ask
the region and time zone, and just
click on next and you should be done.
So with that, your Facebook ad will go
live. So in this case, we are not
publishing it. At any point in time,
you can turn your ad on and off with
this toggle button over here. Uh, this
is on the asset level. Let's go back on
campaign, yeah, so the test campaign
that we have created, we have just
turned it off. Of course, at any point
in time, you can turn it on as well.
And this is where it shows the key
metrics like impressions, reach, uh,
and let's suppose we want to add
another few things. So you just click
on columns and go and customise columns.
So, whatever you need, let's suppose I
want to see clicks. So I just click on
clicks. And then I want to see the CTR.
CTR is basically, uh, the click through
rate.
So, once the data populates over here,
you will see everything over here. So,
just remember a quick difference
between impressions and reach, uh,
Reach is a unique number, impression is
a non-unique number. For example, you
could have reached 100 unique people,
but your impression could be 200. That
means each people have seen your ad for
twice. So that's called a frequency. So,
again, uh, reach could be 100, that is
100 unique people your ad has been
reached to, but they might have seen
your ad for twice on an average, and so
the impression becomes 200. Reach
multiplied by frequency.
OK, so this is how uh the Meta Ads
manager looks like.
With this, you can also come to ads
reporting.
OK. So right now we don't have any
campaign, but you can create your own
reporting dashboard over here with
campaign name, adset name, and ad name,
and with what, uh, other things that
you would need, like, you can have a
breakdown of age, gender, so on and so
forth, so you can understand. So for
example, if you're running 5 different
campaigns, it will basically tell you,
uh, How, which campaign is kind of uh
performing better and which are age
group, gender, region, so on and so
forth.
Now let's go to audiences.
OK, now, Meta supports 3 kinds of
audiences. One is called as custom
audiences, then is a lookalike
audiences, and uh finally, you can save
your audiences as well. So what's a
custom audience? Custom audience is
basically imagine if you have got a
data set of people. Uh, from our data
sourcing agencies, for example, just
imagine, uh, you know, you have seen
those folks on shopping malls who
always ask you for your phone numbers
or email IDs for selling credit cards
and so on and so forth. So imagine in
your neighbourhood you somehow got
access to that data, you can upload
those as custom audiences. This is one
example of custom audiences. Another
could be the first party data that you
have collected, that is basically Uh,
imagine if you're a cafe owner in your
neighbourhood and the people who have
actually signed up in your cafe, uh,
for the cafe, uh, you know, for buying
order and stuff, you always ask for
their phone number or email. So imagine
you have also collected those data, so
you can upload those as custom
audiences, right? So basically,
customer contacts, it could be any
other contacts that you have purchased
or even your website traffic or app,
right?
The lookalike audiences is a little, uh,
I would say, uh, a layered version of
custom audiences. Basically, it just
tries to look into what are the
look-alike versions or interests or
behaviours that is also similar to your
custom audiences, right? So the metas
algorithm try to find out whatever
custom audiences you have uploaded.
What are those users or behaviours that
they are seeing on Instagram or Meta,
and then they also try to look for
similar or lookalike audiences, right?
So basically, as it says, reach new
people who are similar to your
audiences who already care about how it
understands similarity based on their
Instagram or metas, uh, usage
performances, right? So for example, if
Your consumer likes to see cat videos.
Meta will also try to understand
someone who likes cat videos, could be
your potential lookalike audiences or
your potential consumer, right? So this
is all about look-alike audiences. In
the audience section, remember in the
ad set we were selecting a lot of
audiences. You can either target your
own customers, like retarget your own
customers, or you can rely on Meta's AI
which tries to find out look-alike
audiences.
With that, we have uh advertisement
settings over here, like the advertiser
settings, uh, you can use certain
controls like whom do you want to give
access to this dashboard, whom do you
don't want to give access.
Finally, we have the billing and
payment section.
OK. So here, you can use this as a
top-up wallet as well. You can top up
the wallet and uh run your ads. You can
connect your PayTM account or your Visa
or Mastercard, uh, you know, credit or
debit cards. You can add it over here
and run your ads.
Yeah, uh, so these are all the tools
that are available, which might not be
fully activated, uh, because you need a
Instagram business page or a meta
business page also, and then a lot of
other options will also, uh, be opened
up for you.
