For decades, marketeers relied on the
funnel as the model of how consumers
move from awareness to purchase. That
linear path no longer reflects the
reality. In today's age, due to rapid
globalisation, decisions are now
co-shaped by multiple variables. So how
it exactly works, let's take an example
of a hotel chain. First is kind of
proving the value. Proving ensures your
brand is credible through trust signals
like its reviews, site portfolios and
Instagram posts. Then priming happens.
Priming basically builds cultural
relevance, distinctiveness, and
emotional connection that builds over
with the consumers. Together they shape
the decisions beyond the simple path
that we earlier seen in a funnel model.
The model explains the cognitive stages
of a consumer that goes through while
making a buying decision. As I said, it
begins with awareness where the goal is
simple get noticed and create a first
point of recognition. Next is interest.
When you provide enough reason for the
audience to stay curious and explore
further. This leads to desire, where
storytelling and value creation turn
curiosity into a strong emotional need.
Finally, action is where the consumer
takes the next step. It could be either
calling your business or clicking on
your website, or even making a purchase.
Coke in 2015 launched a new product
called Coke Zero. With this, they
created a supporting marketing campaign
which they called a drinkable
advertisement, a clever execution of IA
model that turns the act of drinking
into a powerful advertising experience.
Let's break it down in the next few
minutes to understand how at each stage
Coke used the IDA model. Coca-Cola knew
that to change perceptions they have to
first grab the attention. So they
started with bold visuals, a black
background, a glowing Coke Zero bottle,
and a simple command, just add 0. This
instantly pulled people, got their
eyeball attention as compared to an
unbranded poster. This sparked a
curiosity in the population. Once they
had the attention, Coke built interest
by asking questions people they didn't
expect, What does Coke Zero sugar taste
like? And delivering a surprising
answer, it's still a Coke. This line
tapped into an important insights. Many
consumers didn't really understand how
Coke Zero tasted, so the campaign
pushed them to think again. Next came
the desire stage. The campaign centred
everything around the promise of Coke
Zero, that it's zero sugar with the
same great taste of Coke. Billboards
weren't just images. They poured real
ice cold Coke Zero in sampling stations.
People could literally see it, hear it,
and taste the product right there. And
finally, as per the ADA model, we had
this final stage, which is action, a
23,000 pound drinkable billboard
towering above the Final Four, pouring
real Coke Zero through 4000 ft of
tubing that spelled the words Taste it,
the billboard you could actually drink.
So this is how Coke used the Aida model
by turning everyday ad into something
that you could literally drink.
Coke Zero transformed from awareness to
action, bringing the IDA model to life
in the most refreshing way possible.
