Now let's take another example of how
companies are using either model. The
attention is captured through the image
and the headline. The bright yellow
beetle instantly stands out against the
rich red wedding-themed background,
while the headline says marriage does
come with rewards, immediately pulls
eyeballs of users. In this case, desire
was created through subheadings and ad
copy. The subheading strengthens the
promise made in the headline, while the
body. Explains the reward in the deal.
Together they emotionally position
Beatle as a symbol of joy, independence,
and a fresh beginning, making it the
audience to own it. Action is driven by
the slogan and the contact information.
The slogan reinforces the brand recall.
The contact details clearly guide the
viewer on what to do next. Visit the
showroom, inquire, or connect with the
brand. So there is an action oriented
in this model. So we learned how this
ad effectively shows different elements
are strategically placed to move the
audience from attention to action all
in a single visual. Here is an example
of how the traditional Aida model
evolves when we shift from a funnel
mindset to a flywheel mindset. Remember
the funnel versus flywheel model we
discussed earlier? In a funnel, the
customer journey ends at an action, but
in a flywheel, the journey doesn't stop.
It continues and gains momentum. This
diagram shows how Aida expands,
will move through attention, interest,
design, and action, but now with
additional stages, confidence and
satisfaction that creates an ongoing
energy. This extra stages feeds into
the system, strengthening the retention,
advocacy, and long-term growth. So
while Aida describes the customer
psychological process, the flywheel
model extends its, emphasising how
every stage can continuously reinforce
the consumer relationship and drive
compounding value. Pestel analysis is a
strategic marketing tool used to
examine the external macro environment
in which a business operates. PET
stands for political, economic, social,
technological, legal, and environmental
factors. By studying the six dimensions,
marketeers gain insights and gain
opportunities to identify potential
risk. Political factors help understand
government policies and regulations.
Economic factors reveal trends like
inflation, consumer spending, and
market growth. Social factors help us
understand cultural attitudes,
demographics, and shifting lifestyles.
Technological factors highlight
innovation opportunities and emerging
digital trends. Legal factors identify
laws and compliance requirements that
influence strategy. And finally,
environmental factors assesses
sustainability expectations, ecological
regulations, and environmental
responsibilities. Together, pestile
analysis provides marketeers with a
holistic view of the business landscape.
It helps forecast trends, shape smarter
insights, and shape competitive
positioning, ensuring businesses are
well prepared for a change and future
challenges. Here's the pest analysis of
Starbucks. As we know, the pestile
analysis is a strategic framework that
helps us understand the external
factors influencing the company's
operations and decisions. Starbucks is
influenced by government policies such
as tax regulations, trade agreements,
and political stability within the
region it operates. This forms under
the P or the political. Let's look into
the economic impact. Starbucks'
performance depends on economic
conditions like currency fluctuations,
interest rates, cost of raw materials,
especially the coffee beans they are
either producing or importing, global
macroeconomic trends, and also other
economic challenges. The growth of
Starbucks is shaped by lifestyle
challenges, cultural preferences, and
evolving social trends. The demand for
premium coffee, cafe culture, and
ethical consumerism influences the
demand for Starbucks coffee.
Overall, pistol frameworks helps us
understand how these external forces
shape Starbucks' strategies, risk, and
opportunities in a competitive global
market. Similarly, here is a pistol
analysis for an electronics company
called Samsung, which is the world's
leading technology company. Samsung
operates in multiple regions and is
influenced by global trade policies,
regulatory rules, and tensions between
the US and China trade issues. This
could affect their manufacturing
capabilities and component sourcing,
which is a part of their political
challenges. Now let's try to understand
what are their economic challenges.
Global economic conditions also play a
role in Samsung's performance. Changes
in consumer purchasing power, inflation
of that particular region, and raw
material cost could impact the pricing
and product demand. Let's look into the
sociological impact on Samsung.
Consumer lifestyle trends strongly
shape Samsung's market strategy.
Increasing demand for smart devices,
connected homes, and digital lifestyle
influences product design, innovation,
and again demand. Technology is the
heart of Samsung's competitiveness. The
company leads in 5G development,
semiconductor technology. All these
technological advances, growth or
de-growth, can significantly impact
Samsung's performance. Then we look
into the legal aspect. Samsung operates
across multiple regions in the world,
so they must abide with the local legal
obligations. Any patent disputes,
global data privacy rules can also
significantly affect Samsung's
performance. Samsung needs to create an
eco-friendly product design, green
management system, and extensive
e-waste cycling initiative to meet the
ecological footprint and sustainability
goals. This special analysis highlights
the key external forces shaping
Samsung's strategies, innovations, and
long-term growth. Porter Five forces is
a powerful strategic framework
developed by Michael Porter to evaluate
the competitiveness of an industry. It
examines five key forces that shape
market dynamics. First is competitive
rivalry, how intensely firms are
competing within the industry to
compete with each other. Then we have
supplier power, the influence suppliers
have over pricing and supply conditions.
Third, we have buying power, the
ability of consumers to drive prices
and demand better value. Fourth, we
have the threat of substitution. The
risk that alternative products or
services could replace existing ones.
5th, we have the threat of new entry.
How easily competitors can enter the
new market. So all this combines into a
powerful framework which is known as
Portal 5 forces. Now let's take a look
through a real world practical example
of how a company like Walmart. is using
its Portal 5 forces. The threat of new
entrants for Walmart is very low.
Entering at a large retail space or a
retail market like Walmart requires
scale, significant capital, strict
compliance, and continuous investment
in brand reputation. Walmart's massive
product variety, supplier access,
economies of scale, and low sunk cost
make it difficult for new competitors
to break in.
Next we have the bargaining power of
buyers. The bargaining power of buyers
ranges from medium to low, although
Walmart serves many buyers, but most of
them are small and have limited
influence. Walmart reduces buyer power
through differentiated pricing, low
switching cost, and limited backward
integration from customers. The
bargaining power of suppliers is also
very low. Walmart works with many
suppliers, and because Walmart is often
the biggest and largest buyer, it holds
a strong leverage. Suppliers are easily
interchangeable. Switching costs are
moderate, and that keeps Walmart lean
forward with integration minimal. And
with that, Walmart keeps forward
integration quite minimal. Moving on to
the threat of substitutes, the threat
of substitutes for Walmart is quite low.
Walmart offers a wide range of products
that limit substitutions, and the
alternatives that do not exist that
have very little impact on its overall
sales. Finally, industry rivalry is
medium. Walmart competes with several
smaller sized retailers. Consumer
loyalty is low due to price sensitivity,
and marketing costs remain high.
Exiting the industry remains high, but
steady industry growth and massive US
market share help balance the
competitive pressures for Walmart.
Together these forces show Walmart
remains strong competitive positioning
while still facing meaningful rivalry.
With the retail landscape. Building
onto Porter's five forces, now let's
look at another framework which is
known as SWOT analysis. SWAT stands for
Strength, weakness, Opportunities and
Threat. It's a strategic planning
framework used to evaluate an
organisation or a projects by
identifying its internal strengths and
weakness alongside external
opportunities and threats. It's a 2 by
2 metric that helps businesses maximise
strength, minimise weakness, capitalise
on opportunities, and mitigate threats,
aiding in decision making and
competitive positioning. Let's take an
example of Zomato. First, let's start
with strength. The strength of Zomato
lies in India's leading delivery
service company, which has a market
dominance and almost a global presence
in various other regions and also
provides very strong consumer support.
Looking at the weakness, the company
has been in quite a loss-making to near
profit-making status that has made poor
business decisions. Undergone
management and ownership restructuring
and heavily depends on discounts to
attract newer consumers. For
opportunities, Zomato can benefit from
potential market growth, explore
partnerships and acquisitions, pursue
product diversification, and leverage
its online user base. And finally, for
threats, it includes a fragile business
model, government policy changes, tough
competition, and shrinking profit
margins. This sort analysis highlights
how Zomato's internal capabilities and
external environment shape its strategy
and competitive positioning in the
Indian food delivery market space.
